# Document 112572

THE UNIVERSITY OF ARIZONA
uN Cooperative Extension Backyard Gardener
® | Yavapai Count;
_— #49

Peach Tree Borer

Peach tree borers are native insects that would normally colonize native Prunus species. The cause serious damage to
the lower trunk and can kill young peach trees if left unchecked. Commercial and backyard orchards having peach,
nectarine, plum, cherry, apricot and almond trees are susceptible.

Adult peach tree borers (Synanthedon exitiosa) are steel blue to black moths with transparent wings that emerge in the
late spring and early summer. They have an orange band on their abdomen and this causes them to resemble a wasp.
Females lay their eggs during summer, usually June through August, on the bark at the base of tree trunks. After
hatching, the larvae tunnel into the sapwood of the tree at or slightly below ground level. The larvae (caterpillars) are
light brown or pinkish with a slightly darker head.

1635138
Peachtree borer (Synanthedon exitiosa) adult male Peachtree borer (Synanthedon exitiosa) adult female (J.A. Peachtree borer (Synanthedon exitiosa) larvae (Wendell Snow,

UGA1361111 5360746

(Wendell Snow, USDA Agricultural Research Service, USDA Agricultural Research Service, Bugwood.org).

Bugwood.org).

Davidson, Univ. Md, College Pk, Bugwood.org).

Larvae feed under the bark through the summer, and move down the trunk
as cold weather approaches. The partially grown larvae resume feeding in
the spring. Pupation takes place under the bark, and lasts about two
weeks. Moths begin to emerge in late spring, at which time mating takes
place and the cycle repeats. Their feeding girdles the tree, disrupting the
flow of water and nutrients in the xylem and organic compounds in the
phloem.

Insecticide applications can be effective at controlling the early larval stag-
es. Peach tree borers can be controlled by insecticides that contain carbar- :

. . woe . . Peachtree borer (Synanthedon exitiosa) damage as it often ap-
yl, permethrin or esfenvalerate. These insecticides are available in some pears on the soil surface (Eugene E. Nelson, Bugwood.org).
garden centers and on-line (read the label to ensure the product is labeled
for edible fruit). In older references, naphthalene crystals (mothballs or moth crystals) are often listed as a chemical
control. Since naphthalene crystals are not labeled for this use, it is no longer a recommended practice due to environ-
mental concerns.

An environmentally-friendly method of peach tree borer control uses the insect parasitic nematode Steinernema car-
pocapsae. Parasitic nematodes are tiny roundworms available from biocontrol catalogs. This species parasitizes the
peach tree borer larvae. Nematode applications are most effective when larvae are feeding actively and tunnel open-
ings are largest in late summer. The nematodes are applied with a squeeze bottle in suspension with water. This meth-
od is not as effective as pesticide treatment, but it will work if applied with sufficient water to moisten the soil and tem-
peratures are above 50 degrees F.

=== New Page ===

Peach Tree Borer BYG #49

The best preventative treatment for any pest species is proper care. You simply maintain the highest level of thrift and

vigor in your orchard. Fertilize, water, avoid sunscald, prune, control weeds, and lastly, observe the trees for early signs
of pest infestations.

Additional Resource

Peach Tree Borer
University of Arizona, Yavapai County Bulletin #29

January 15, 2023

Adapted from original Backyard Gardener publications by Jeff Schalau, Agent, Agriculture & Natural Resources,
University of Arizona Cooperative Extension, Yavapai County

The University of Arizona is an equal opportunity, affirmative action institution. The University does not discriminate
on the basis of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, age, disability, veteran status, sexual orientation, gender
identity, or genetic information in its programs and activities.

2