# Document 112616

THE UNIVERSITY OF ARIZONA
uN Cooperative Extension Backyard Gardener
® | Yavapai Count;
_— #68

Deciduous Trees

Chinese Pistache

The Chinese pistache (Pistacia chinensis) is an excellent tree for most areas of Ya-
vapai County. It is a medium to large deciduous hardwood tree that will fit into larger
home landscapes. It is suitable for USDA Plant Hardiness Zones 6-9 and at maturity,
reaches a height of 30-35 ft and width of 20-30 ft. The leaves are compound pinnate (a
long leaf stem with 11 to 17 leaflets) and alternately arranged on the stems and
branches. It has impressive fall color (scarlet, crimson, orange, sometimes yellow),
even in milder climates. This tree is also resistant to insects and many plant diseases.

Chinese pistache tree (Pistacia
The Chinese pistache is dioecious. This means each tree is either a male that produces chinensis) showing leaves in fall
pollen (with little or no allergenic qualities) or female producing attractive (but inedible) sity of Georgie, Bugwocd.og)
berries that are attractive to birds. Once established, it is very drought, wind, and heat , “ss
tolerant. The Chinese pistache is a close relative of the pistachio nut tree (Pistacia vera), but is much more cold hardy.
The wood is also very hard and rot resistant. Waterlogged soils are not suitable for Chinese pistache trees.

Young Chinese pistache trees should be planted in spring or fall. They must have full sun and do best in well-drained
soil. However, they tolerate a wide range of soils, some alkalinity, and can live a very long time (several centuries). If
there is a downside to the Chinese pistache, it is that young trees appear spindly and awkward. Trees planted from #5
and #15 containers will probably require staking and grow slowly for the first three years after planting. Some structural
pruning may also be necessary in the early years to develop an even canopy and proper branch spacing. Once estab-
lished, they can grow up to two feet in height and width per year.

Liquid Amber

The Liquidambar tree (Liquidambar styraciflua) is native to the warm temperate areas of the
southeastern United States and tropical montane (cloud forest) regions of Mexico and Cen-
tral America. This tree is well suited to the mid-elevations of north central Arizona including
Prescott, Payson, and the Verde Valley. They are not commonly planted in our region, but
they do well. They do require supplemental irrigation and are not a replacement for more
drought-tolerant species such as mesquite and desert willow. However, Liquidambar trees do
produce excellent fall colors ranging from burgundy and red to orange and yellow.

Before rushing to plant a Liquidambar tree, you should consider your soils and the tree’s irri-
gation requirements. Highly alkaline, rocky soils are probably not best suited for Liquidambar.
Granitic or sandstone derived soils as well as streamside alluvium should be less alkaline
and provide a more hospitable soil environment for these trees. Avoid limestone derived soils
for this tree. Irrigation requirements would be comparable to ash or Arizona cypress.

Sweetgum (Liquidambar

At first glance, you might mistake a Liquidambar, commonly called sweetgum, for a maple. styraciflua), John Ruter, Uni-
The leaves are palmate (almost star-shaped) and have alternate arrangement on the stem. versity of Georgia, Bug-
Maples can be differentiated by their opposite leaf arrangement. Liquidambar trees can get wood.org.

60 to 75 feet tall in their native range, but mostly stay within 30 to 35 feet in Arizona. It is de-

ciduous and is most often shaped like a pyramid. Liquidambar has glossy, green leaves with inconspicuous flowers
and the fruits are round and covered with soft, rounded (not prickly) spines. It prefers full sun and is hardy to USDA
Plant Hardiness Zone 5B (-10 to -15 degrees F). Another interesting feature of some liquidambar cultivars are flat-
tened, corky bark projections on the trunk and larger stems. Many cultivars are sold and ‘Moraine’ is said to be the har-
diest cultivar tolerating -25 degrees F.

=== New Page ===

Deciduous Trees BYG #68

Disease problems are not known to occur in north central Arizona, but this could be due to their relative scarcity. In their
native range, they are known to be impacted by some fungal diseases much like aspens, cottonwoods and willows are
impacted by fungal diseases here. Some potential insect pests of Liquidambar include fall webworm, cottony cushion
scale, and tent caterpillars. All can be found in our area. However, cottony cushion scale is the worst of those listed.

Desert Willow

The desert willow (Chilopsis linearis) is an excellent drought tolerant tree for north central Ari-
zona. It is not a willow at all, but a close relative of the catalpa tree and a member of the trum-
pet vine family (Bignoniaceae). This deciduous, native tree/shrub can be found along dry
washes and seasonal creeks in desert, chaparral, and grassland habitats between 1,500 and
5,500 foot elevations. Its native range extends from western Texas to southern Nevada, Ari-
zona, southern California, and northern Mexico, and as far north as Kansas. Some cultivars
are hardy to 0 degrees F and all require little supplemental irrigation once established.

The desert willow is very graceful with an airy, open canopy. Hence, it does not make dense
shade or a highly effective windbreak. In the wild, they can grow to 20 feet tall by 20 feet
wide. With irrigation, they can get slightly larger. Desert willows are usually multi-trunked, but
they can be pruned to a single trunk if desired. If training to a single trunk, the tree will likely
have basal suckers that will need to be pruned out periodically.

. . . . Desert willow (Chilopsis linear-
The narrow, curving leaves are 3 to 5 inches long and 1/4 to 1 inch wide. They look very is). Vanessa Richins Myers

graceful but have a surprisingly tough, leathery texture. Desert willows are best known for About.com, Bugwood.org.
their showy flowers that appear in clusters on branch tips from late spring to late summer and

can vary in color from pinkish white to deep purple. Normally, they are off-white to pale lavender with yellow spots or
stripes in the throat of the trumpet-shaped blossoms. The flowers have a sweet fragrance that attracts bees, butterflies,
and hummingbirds. The flowering season can be extended with supplemental irrigation during hot droughty periods
(usually May and June).

Long, narrow seedpods form after the flowers bloom and persist on the tree through the winter and then split open to
release hundreds of fuzzy seeds. A downside to desert willow is the messy seasonal dropping of pods and seeds. On
many cultivars and native grown trees, the seeds may germinate in a moist seedbed. Some cultivars do not produce

seed pods.

Being a native, the desert willow has relatively few pests or diseases. Aphids may appear on the new leaves and blos-
soms in the spring. These can be treated with a high pressure spray. If they persist, mix 1 TBSP dish detergent (a non-
citrus scented type) with a gallon of water and spray it on. Better yet, let the natural predators and hummingbirds eat
them. Hummingbirds and pollinating insects love the nectar produced by desert willow flowers.

London Plane

The London plane (Plantanus x acerifolia) is a large landscape tree that is widely planted in landscapes, parks, and
streets in north central Arizona. It is well-adapted for planting in temperate climates worldwide from Johannesburg,
South Africa to Sydney, Australia. Most horticulturists believe the London plane is a hybrid between American sycamore
(P. occidentalis) and the Oriental plane (P. orientalis). At maturity, the London plane is often 60-80 feet wide and can be
50-60 feet tall. However, northern Arizona specimens are not usually this large.

Given its size, care should be taken to plant a London plane in a space where it can fully express it’s beauty. This in-
cludes keeping it 30 feet away from structures and providing ample rooting space and avoiding areas with underground
utilities. They have also been known to lift sidewalks and patio slabs when planted too close.

London plane trees need full sun and are hardy to USDA Plant Hardiness Zone 5 (lows of -20 degrees F). These trees
do tolerate the alkaline soils found across Arizona and require regular irrigation. However, large specimens of London
plane in Yavapai County seem to survive with little irrigation beyond natural rainfall once they have become established.

=== New Page ===

Deciduous Trees BYG #68

London plane trees tend to be a somewhat messy, seemingly dropping something every day of the year. In fall, when
other deciduous trees are dropping their leaves, the London plane leaves die, but persist on the branches throughout
the entire winter. Many leaves may drop on a windy winter day, but many seem to hang on for months. London planes
also have interesting spherical fruits which when broken apart hold hundreds of fluffy seeds.

If you were thinking about planting a sycamore, the London plane is a better option, due to the anthracnose disease
which affects sycamore trees.

- ee < a ——_ ———"
London plane tree on Gurley St. in Prescott, AZ near the Sharlot Hall
Museum. Leaves and fruit are shown in the upper left photo and the

= ama Fos UGA1234089
Foliar symptoms of sycamore anthracnose
(Apiognomonia veneta, Clemson University -

bark is shown in the upper right photo. (Platanus x acerifolia, Jeff USDA Cooperative Extension Slide Series, Bug-
Schalau, University of Arizona). wood.org).
Mesquite

Mesquite trees are often removed from residential areas without consideration
of their many virtues. Sure, they are spiny and often shrubby in form, but they
also require little or no irrigation, provide food and cover for wildlife, attract bees
and other interesting insects, and provide nesting sites and habitat for migratory
songbirds. In other words, they have value that extends far beyond being a
charcoal source for your backyard barbeque.

Velvet mesquite (Prosopis velutina) is the native species found in the Verde
Valley. It grows as a tree on the floodplains and terraces near the Verde River
and its tributaries. It often becomes shrubbier when on slopes and rocky areas. = a
Mesquite has the ability to extract water from deep within the soil and where it —_- Velvet mesquite (Prosopis velutina) tree. This
grows near rivers and streams. It can also develop a two-tiered root system: one “°ciduous, shrub-like species forms thickets

. . along rivers, streams, and arroyos (photo by
shallow and one deeper (near groundwater). In Yavapai County, mesquites are — sye Smith http://cals.arizona.edu/

rarely seen above the 5,000 feet elevation. yavapaiplants).

Mesquite bosques (Spanish for “forests”) once lined the Verde River on the remnant floodplain terraces. Some remnant
bosques are still present along the Verde and in these areas, mesquites trees can be up to 30 feet tall. Alteration of ri-
parian areas and development has greatly decreased the number and overall acreage of mesquite bosques across Ari-
zona. In some areas where mesquite bosques have been removed, invasive woody species such as tree of heaven,
saltcedar, and Russian olive have replaced them.

Mesquite trees are also legumes (relatives of beans and peas) which have the ability to “fix” atmospheric nitrogen, thus
increasing nitrogen available to plants in the soil. Here, legume roots become associated with beneficial soil bacteria
(Rhizobium sp.) which have the ability to convert inert nitrogen gas (78% of earth’s atmosphere) to a form that plants
can use. In essence, they fertilize themselves and neighboring plants through this symbiotic process. This process is
also utilized by many gardeners when they plant nitrogen fixing cover crops to enrich garden soil.

3

=== New Page ===

Deciduous Trees BYG #68

Clusters of fragrant cream colored mesquite flowers bloom in the late spring — in fact, many vegetable gardeners wait
until the mesquite trees bloom to plant warm season vegetable crops. Honeybees are often brought into mesquite stands
to gather nectar to make flavorful, light-colored honey.

The flowers develop into seedpods and ripened seeds become hard shelled beans. These beans are valuable wildlife
and livestock forage. The mature beans can be ground into sweet flour. This flour tastes sweet all by itself and makes an
excellent addition to cookies, pancakes, and cornbread.

Other Arizona native mesquites are honey mesquite (Prosopis glandulosa) and screwbean mesquite (Prosopis pu-
bescens). Both species are found at lower elevations than velvet mesquite, but are suitable for planting below the 4,000
feet elevation and would be an excellent choice for drought tolerant landscaping in Arizona. Honey mesquite is popular
in the nursery trade as it becomes an attractive, almost stately, tree. Screwbean mesquite has a twisted branching habit
and an attractive, twisted seedpod. These are less common in nurseries. Avoid the Chilean mesquite hybrids as they will
not tolerate our winter temperatures.

Urban legends sometimes say that mesquites harbor Texas root rot (caused by the fungus Phymatotrichopsis omnivora)
also called cotton root rot. Texas root rot is a disease that is present in some areas of the Verde Valley and it can infect a
broad range of host plants. Mesquite trees tend to tolerate the presence of Texas root rot. This does not mean that it har-
bors the disease, but since it is somewhat tolerant, the disease could be present and have little or no effect on the mes-
quite. When a more susceptible host is planted in these areas, it could succumb to the disease while mesquites continue
to survive. Fruit and nut trees, grapes, roses, sycamore, cottonwood, ash, oleander, xylosma, and many other species
are very susceptible to Texas root rot.

Mesquites are an excellent choice for drought tolerant landscaping, compatible with birds and wildlife, produce food, and
have a lot of character.

Screwbean mesquite fruit. Photo by Patrick Alexan-

der @http://swbiodiversity.org, Usage Rights: Crea- Velvet mesquite fruit. Photo by Sue ; ;
tive Commons Attribution-ShareAlike (CC BY-SA) Smith, https://cals.arizona.edu/ Honey mesquite fruit. Photo by Sue
yavapaiplants Smith, https://cals.arizona.edu/

yavapaiplants

=== New Page ===

Deciduous Trees BYG #68

Honey Locust

The honeylocust (G/editsia triacanthos) is an excellent deciduous tree for both commercial and residential plantings
across Arizona (suitable for USDA Plant Hardiness Zones 3-9). It has few pests, an interesting branching pattern, toler-
ates our summer heat, and has moderate irrigation requirements.

Honeylocust is a member of the pea/bean (Leguminosae) family. It produced seeds in long, flat, twisted pods. The
seeds have impermeable coats and do not readily germinate until the seed coat has been mechanically broken or it has
passed through the gut of an animal. This is true for many seeds in this family: mesquite, palo verde, catclaw, lupine,
etc.

Native grown honeylocust saplings produce woody spines which are undesirable in landscape situations. As these
trees mature, they tend to produce fewer spines. However, when cuttings are grown from thorn-less portions of mature
trees they tend to remain thornless. The nursery industry has used this to produce honeylocust cultivars that have no
thorns and have desirable growth forms and/or interesting foliage colors. These are grown from vegetative cuttings or
are grafted onto seedling rootstock. Every once in a while you may see a mature honeylocust tree with spines. These
individuals were probably grown from seed.

Honeylocusts are adapted to salty and/or alkaline soils making them a good choice for arid areas. Once mature, they
have a lacey canopy which provides good visibility through the canopy and grass can grow right up to the trunk. The
sweet smelling flowers are much favored by bees and the juicy pulp between the seeds within the pods is relished by
cattle and wildlife. The wood is very hard, very heavy, and resistant to decay. It is used occasionally for furniture, fence
posts and railroad ties. Because Arizona is outside of honeylocust’s native range, there are relatively few pest manage-
ment issues.

Following are a few of the most popular varieties (cultivars) of honeylocust:

‘Moraine’ is thornless and fruitless, has a broad graceful form, dark green leaves, and golden yellow fall color.
‘Shademaster’ has ascending (downward sloping) branches, dark green leaves, is almost fruitless, and is a strong
grower.

‘Sunburst’ is broadly pyramidal, has golden yellow new leaves that mature to bright green, and is fruitless.

‘Summer Lace’ is vigorous and graceful, has light green leaves that mature to dark green, with a broad rounded cano-
Py.

‘Ruby Lace’ has red new leaves that turn purplish bronze maturing to green in summer, many people feel that this is
not the best honeylocust.

June 23, 2024

Adapted from original Backyard Gardener publications by Jeff Schalau, Agent, Agriculture & Natural Resources,
University of Arizona Cooperative Extension, Yavapai County

The University of Arizona is an equal opportunity, affirmative action institution. The University does not discriminate
on the basis of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, age, disability, veteran status, sexual orientation, gender
identity, or genetic information in its programs and activities.

5