# Document 112704

COLLEGE OF AGRICULTURE
AND LIFE SCIENCES

COOPERATIVE EXTENSION

®

THE UNIVERSITY
OF ARIZONA

Yavapai County

Bulletin #61

Insect and Disease Problems

Insects and disease pose two of the most serious threats
to your tree’s health. As soon as you notice any abnor-
mality in your tree’s appearance, you must begin a careful
analysis to gain an understanding of the problem. By ex-
amining the specific symptoms of damage and under-
standing their causes, you can make reasonable diagnosis
of the problem and select the proper treatment. When
uncertain, or to confirm your suspicions, be sure to contact
your local arborist, a tree care professional, Master Gar-
dener, or Extension agent.

The Nature of Tree Health Problems

Basic elements that promote plant health include sufficient
water, optimum temperature and light, and a proper bal-
ance of nutrients. Too much or too little of any of these
elements can cause stress.

Environmental stress is the primary cause of most plant
health problems.

Stress may be classified in two broad categories: acute
and chronic. Acute stress, which can be caused by such
things as improper pesticide sprays, or untimely frosts or
freezes, occurs suddenly and causes almost immediate
damage. Chronic stress takes a longer time to affect plant
health, and may be a result of nutritional imbalance, im-
proper soil pH, incorrect light intensity, or other factors. To
make matters worse, disease organisms and insects com-
monly attack an already-stressed tree, adding further dam-
age to the existing symptoms. Provided that symptoms
are recognized early, there is usually enough time to cor-
rect imbalances caused by chronic stresses, making them
easier to deal with than acute stresses. Often by the time
an acute stress is apparent, the damage has already been
done and the only thing left to do is learn from the experi-
ence and prevent it from happening again.

s

Plant Diseases

Whether on trees, shrubs, or other plants, plant diseases

require three things to develop:

e Presence of a disease causing agent called a patho-
gen
Susceptibility to that particular pathogen
Environmental factors which can affect both the plant
and the pathogen

These factors are subject to a great deal of variation, de-
pending on the particular plant and pathogen involved.
For example, genetic variability causes plants to respond
differently to disease, just as it controls height variations,
autumn color, and susceptibility to insect attack. Weather
and soil conditions also have different effects on different
plants.

Diseases can be classified in two broad categories:
e Those caused by infection or living agents
e Those caused by non-infection or non-living agents

Examples of infection agents include fungi, viruses, and
bacteria. Non-infectious diseases, which account for 70
to 90 percent of all plant problems in urban areas, can be
caused by such factors as nutrient deficiencies, tempera-
ture extremes, pollutants, and fluctuations in moisture.
Factors of non-infectious diseases can often produce
symptoms similar to those caused by infectious diseases.
Therefore, it is essential to distinguish between the two in
order to give proper treatment.

Correct diagnosis of plant disease requires a careful ex-
amination of the situation and systematic elimination of
possibilities by following a few important steps.

1. Accurately identify the plant. Because infectious
pathogens are mostly plant— specific, this information
can quickly limit the number of suspected diseases.

2. Look for a pattern of abnormality. This can often
provide key information regarding the cause of the
problem. For example, if the affected plants are re-
stricted to a walkway, road, or fence, the disorder
could be a result of wood preservatives, de-icing
salts, or other harsh chemicals.

=== New Page ===

Insect and Disease Problems

3. Carefully examine the land. Factors to observe
include: land contour, history of the property, num-
ber of species affected, and percentage of injured
plants in the area. Land contour can be a signifi-
cant contributor to plant disease, since low or poor-
ly drained areas are ideal for the development of
root rot induced by a variety of water molds. The
history of the property and adjacent land may re-
veal many problems such as herbicides applied to
agricultural lands or sanitary landfills whose gas
can drift several hundred feet and damage plants.
The number of species affected may also help to
distinguish between infectious pathogens that are
more plant-specific as compared to chemical or
environmental factors that affect many different
species. Most living pathogens take a relatively
long time to spread throughout an area, so if a
large percentage of plants become diseased criti-
cally overnight, a pathogen is probably not in-
volved.

4. Examine the roots. Note their color: brown to
black roots may signal problems. Brown roots of-
ten indicate dry soil conditions or the presence of
toxic chemicals. Black roots usually reflect overly
wet soil or the presence of root-rotting organisms.

5. Check the trunk and branches. Examine the
trunk thoroughly for wounds, as they provide en-
trances for cankers and wood-rotting organisms.
Such wounds may be caused by weather, fire,
lawnmowers, rodents, and a variety of other envi-
ronmental and mechanical factors. You can avoid
extensive decline by removing branch stubs and
pruning out cankered limbs.

6. Note the position and appearance of affected
leaves. Dead leaves at the top of the tree are usu-
ally the result of environmental or mechanical root
stress. Twisted or curled leaves may indicate viral
infection, insect feeding, or exposure to herbicides.
The size and color of the foliage may tell a great
deal about the plant’s condition., so make note of
these and any other abnormalities.

7. Think about current and past management
practices. Sometimes a plant’s current problem is
actually a result of something that happened to it
much earlier. Changes in grade, the use of pesti-
cides, or nearby construction work may all contrib-
ute to tree problems.

Armed with information from this careful examination,
you can now consult a plant disease reference or ex-
pert and make a diagnosis of the problem.

Bulletin #61

Insect Problems
Insects can cause considerable damage to trees and
shrubs. By defoliating trees or sucking out their sap, in-
sects retard their growth, weakening and sometimes kill-
ing them. By boring into the trunk and
branches, they interfere with sap flow
and weaken the tree structure to a
point where it may be easily blown
over by the wind. Insects may also
carry disease by providing an entry-
way for fungi, bacteria, and viruses.

It is important to remember, however, that some insects
are beneficial rather than destructive; they may help with
pollination or act as predators of more harmful species.
Therefore, killing all insects without regard to their kind
and function can actually be detrimental to tree health.

Insects may be divided into three categories according to
their method of feeding: chewing, sucking, and boring.
Insects from each group have characteristic patterns of
damage that will help you determine the culprit and the
proper way to get rid of it. Always consult a tree expert if
you have any doubt about the nature of the insect prob-
lem or the proper way to eliminate it.

Chewing insects eat plant tissue such as leaves, flow-
ers, buds and twigs. Indications of damage by these in-
sects if often seen by uneven or broken margins on the
leaves or other affected plant parts. A few examples
from this large insect category are:

e beetles and their larvae (grubs)

e webworms

e bagworms

e larvae of moths and sawflies (caterpillars)

Because these insects ingest plant material, they may be
killed by spraying plants with a stomach poison either
during active feeding or before insects appear. Such poi-
sons normally take effect 24 to 48 hours after application.
These chemicals are also typically poisonous to humans,
which means they must never be used when there is any
possibility of children chewing or eating sprayed leaves or
fruits.

Sucking insects insert a special beak into the tissues of
leaves, twigs, branches, flowers, or fruit and then suck
out the plant’s juices. Some typical examples of sucking
insects are aphids, mealy bugs, thrips, and leaf hoppers.
Damage caused by these pests is often indicated by: dis-
coloration, drooping, wilting, and or general lack of vigor
in the affected plant.

=== New Page ===

Insect and Disease Problems

Because sucking insects do not eat the outer surfaces of
plants, they are not affected by stomach poisons. Con-
tact poisons, which directly hit an insect’s body and kill
by burning, asphyxiation, or paralysis, must be used.
These poisons must be applied when insects are pre-
sent, and often will need to be reapplied if insects reap-
pear.

Boring insects are characterized by the tunnels they
make in the wood of a tree as they eat through it. Be-
cause each kind has its own style and tunnel pattern,
borers may be identified by their work even after they
have left the scene. One example of borers is the ter-
mite (usually not serious in trees). Eventually, most bor-
ers eat their way into a tree, making a round opening out
of which they effect a characteristic substance called a
frass, composed of semi-digested wood.

Trees infested with borers typically show a thinness of
crown and a gradual or sudden decline of vigor. Conclu-
sive symptoms are circular holes in the trunk or branch-
es, with frass and sometimes dripping sap, which forms
a dark stain along the bark. Borer holes may be distin-
guished from other holes (such as those made by birds
like the sapsucker) because they are deep, irregularly
located, and usually made at an angle, indicating tun-
nels underneath. (Sapsucker holes are very shallow
and made in even rows.) When borers eat a tree’s
heartwood or sapwood only, they cause mostly structur-
al damage that weakens the tree. Their tunnels also
provide entry for other insects and wood-rotting fungi.
Borers that eat the inner bark and the cambium directly
destroy the tree’s vital parts and kill it quickly.

When present, borers may be directly attacked. When
their tunnels are open, they may be impaled on a piece
of wire. If they cannot be reached mechanically, they
may be asphyxiated by poisonous gas or liquid.

Reformatted August 1, 2007
http://extension.arizona.edu/yavapai
Source: International Society of Aboriculture, Urbana, IL

The University of Arizona is an equal opportunity, affirmative action institution. The University does not discriminate on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, age,

Bulletin #61

The method used for a particular insect problem will de-
pend on the species involved, the extent of the problem,
and a variety of other factors specific to the situation.

As mentioned previously, always consult a professional
if you have any doubt about the nature of the insect
problem or the proper way to eliminate it.

No endorsement of named products is intended nor is
criticism implied of similar products that are not men-
tioned. Pesticides are poisonous. Always read the
carefully follow all label instructions for safety, use, and
disposal given the container label.

disability, veteran status, or sexual orientation in its programs and activities.