# Document 113634

February 13, 2024

The Crop Rotator

Your Voice Matters to the Field Crops IPM Team at the
University of Arizona Cooperative Extension!

We invite you to share your insights and experiences with our Field Crops
Programs through this brief, anonymous survey. Your feedback is important to
the success and effectiveness of our programs, which include a wide range of
activities such as Extension meetings, workshops, field days, publications, the “AZ-
AG Newsletter”, and our hands-on services in pest and disease management, and
plant and insect diagnostics. Our mission is to deliver quality, scientifically-backed
educational materials, focusing on critical areas such as insect, weed, disease,
nematode, and soil health management. Your input will play a crucial role in
shaping our programs, ensuring they meet the needs of the desert agricultural
community and positively impact your industry in Arizona. Your participation is
highly valued and contributes significantly to our continuous improvement.

Please follow the link below to access the survey. It should take less than five
minutes to complete, and your responses will remain anonymous - https://

qr.page/g/3XdEI894Sb4

If you have any questions on the survey, please contact Naomi Pier

at nmpier@arizona.edu.

We thank you for your time and support!

fp < Cathy L. Martinez, CED
ff Ps ,, )
Cooperative Extension, Pinal County / 820sE/ Cottonwood Lane, #C, Casa Grande, AZ 85122

Tel: (520) 836-5221, x203 / Cell: (520) 483-9119 / Email: clmartin@cals.arizona.edu

=== New Page ===

February 13, 2024

When: Wednesday, April 17, 2024
Where: Maricopa Ag Center, 37860 W Smith Enke Rd, Maricopa, AZ 85138

and Via Zoom ( : https://arizona.zoom.us/j/88668178449)

Speakers: The event will have speakers representing irrigation companies, farmers,
scientists, and technicians

Who should
attend: Growers, PCAs, Ag industry representatives and anyone interested in agriculture in Arizona

: https://maintainsystems.rsvpify.com
Zoom link: https://arizona.zoom.us/j/88668178449

CLICK HERE for Agenda

For further questions, contact:
Dr. Diaa Eldin Elshikha, PhD
Assistant Professor and Irrigation Specialist
University of Arizona Maricopa Agriculture Center
Office: 520-374-6239
Mobile: 520-518-0394

2024 High Cotton Winners Announced:

The Farm Press/Cotton Foundation High Cotton Award winners for
2024 have been announced. The winners represent the four main regions

of the cotton belt. The Western Region Winner of the 2024 High Cotton
Award is Arizona Grower Jerry Rovey. Jerry and his family’s Flying R Farms
in Buckeye; excel over 60 years of cotton and field crops production. For
more information about the award, CLICK HERE.

The University of Arizona is an equal opportunity provider. Learn more: extension.arizona.edu/legal-disclaimer.

=== New Page ===

February 13, 2024

Join Us in Enhancing Irrigation Efficiency
Through Soil Moisture Sensor Research

We are launching a project (further details provided below) to install soil moisture sensors for a
year in farms throughout the state of Arizona, aiming to help farmers track and manage soil
moisture for better irrigation. Given the project's limited funding, we will be applying a first-
come, first-served approach.

Project Focus:

Our goal is to gain a better understanding of soil moisture dynamics to empower farmers like you
with more efficient irrigation management strategies. By participating, you contribute directly to the
development of tools that can enhance your decision-making process regarding when and how
much to irrigate.

Your Contribution:

We are offering the installation of a soil moisture sensor on your farm, a device that will collect
valuable data crucial to improving irrigation models and apps developed by Dr. Peter Waller from
the University of Arizona. Your insights and experiences are integral to this research, and we
believe the results will directly benefit farmers across the state.

Data Confidentiality:

Your privacy is paramount to us. Any data collected from the soil moisture sensors will be handled
with the utmost confidentiality. If you choose to share your irrigation data, rest assured that it will be
kept strictly confidential. Presentations of research findings will anonymize all information, ensuring
no mention of specific farm names.

Benefits to You:

Participating in this research not only advances our collective understanding of soil moisture but
also provides you with insights to manage your irrigations more efficiently, potentially leading to
improved crop yields.

Installation Details:

We will handle the installation of the sensors ourselves, but we may need a bit of assistance from
you or a farm helper for an hour or two every time we need to install or remove the sensor. Your
involvement during this phase is minimal, and we will ensure the process is as smooth as possible.

Next Steps:
If you are interested in being part of this initiative or have any questions, please respond to this

email. We will then provide you with additional details, including the installation process and a
tentative timeline for the study.

If you are interested in participating or if you like more information, contact:

Dr. Diaa Eldin Elshikha Office: 520-374-6239
diaaelshikha@arizona.edu Mobile: 520-518-0394

=== New Page ===

February 13, 2024

EPA Update on Chlorpyrifos;
Reinstatement of Tolerances

ICYMI: The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) is amending its regulations to reflect the
current legal status of the chlorpyrifos (e.g., Losrban) tolerances following a court order
vacating the Agency's revocation of those tolerances. EPA is issuing this as a final action that
is effective upon publication since this action simply conforms the regulations to reflect the
tolerances that have already been legally reinstated by the court's order.

Dr. Al Fournier of the Arizona Pest Management Center quoted this release with some
emphasis added

“Since the tolerances are currently in effect, growers can now use currently

registered chlorpyrifos products on all crops with reinstated tolerances, consistent with
directions for use on those product labels. However, such uses may be subject to
restrictions by individual states.”

“At this time, any existing final cancelation orders, including any terms for sale,
distribution, and use of existing stocks of products subject to those cancelation orders
and related return programs for chlorpyrifos products, remain in place, unless and until

amended by EPA.”

As registration review continues...

“The Agency expects to expeditiously propose a new rule to revoke the tolerances for all
but 11 uses with additional restrictions for geographic location and rate of application to
address safety of the tolerances, and potential restrictions for farmworker and other
vulnerable populations, and vulnerable species and their habitats. Those 11 uses
[expected to be retained] are: alfalfa, apple, asparagus, cherry (tart), citrus, cotton,
peach, soybean, strawberry, sugar beet, wheat (spring), and wheat (winter).”

Please carefully review all details in EPA’s announcement below.

Feel free to contact Al Fournier, if you have questions.
fournier@arizona.edu