# Document 113606

THE UNIVERSITY OF ARIZONA >
IK Cooperative Extension
© | Mohave County

Mohave County Master Gardener Program
101 E. Beale Street, Suite A, Kingman AZ 86401-5808 ¢ 928-753-3788 ¢ Fax: 928-753-1665
Email: mohavemg@gmail.com https://extension.arizona.edu/mohave-master-gardener

Table of Contents

Featured Article “The Boojum Tree, an unexpected surprise”
Andrew’s Corner .
Bullhead City Master Gardeners .
Kingman Master Gardeners .
Calendar of Events...............
Lake Havasu City Master Garderners.
“Mice and Rabbits, Oh My”...
“Bruch Mosaic Pot”

OMNDAUNAH

Fea tured. Article

Debhie Miller, Aula Cty Master Gardener

The Boojum Tree, an unexpected surprise

You just never know what you are going to see when
you visit the client’s property on a Hotline call. It’s
a pretty safe bet you’ll discover improper irrigation
methods are at least a partial cause of whatever
problem the client is having, but many calls turn

out to be interesting for reasons other than what the
original call was about.

A recent call to look at some citrus trees “not doing
well” in Ft. Mohave is a case in point. The owner
requested our citrus specialist, Bill Stillman to come
look at his citrus trees. We always try to involve
more than one Master Gardener on a site visit, so
Leroy Jackson and I tagged along. I went mostly
because I am sick of being cooped up, and have had
both vaccinations, as have Bill and Leroy.

Thank heavens I did! I love cactus and all related
things, and the owner’s gardens were just full of
them. He had begun planting the property over 30
years ago when they built the house. Many of the
“traditional” columnar cacti were huge, and several

Wind & Weeds Spring 2021 t

were in pretty bad shape since he had lost
interest in watering on a regular basis

many years before. There were, however,

a couple of healthy 3-foot cardons, two tall
unarmed saguaros that were still alive and
some mid-size totem pole cacti scattered
around. In addition, there were stressed and
less-stressed examples of the more common
columnar cacti—San Pedro and what
nurseries generally label Peruvian Apple
cactus. Most of his barrel cacti had not
survived.

The reason for my excitement, however, was
a plant I’d only seen pictures of—a very tall
boojum tree (fouquieria columnaris, also
called idria columnaris). 1 had tried to grow
this ocotillo sister-plant ten years ago when
we first moved to Arizona, and my 6” potted
specimens lasted about a year. I hadn’t tried
again since becoming a Master Gardener,
and I had never seen one taller than about
one foot! I knew it was described as an
upside-down carrot, and is known as Cirio
(meaning taper or candle) in its native Baja.
The tall boojums are seldom seen outside of
Baja and a small United States section of the
Sonoran desert. The plant is not listed in any
of the editions of the Sunset Western Garden
Book 1 own, but the author Mary Irish does
mention it in at least one of her books on
Southwestern horticulture (“Gardening in the
Deserts of Nevada”).

=== New Page ===

(Featured Article -continued from page 1)

OSS

Interestingly, there are three surviving boojum trees
(of several originally planted in the late 1920’s)

on the University of Arizona campus. They are

in the Joseph Wood Krutch Garden, and one of

the naturalists involved in creating this garden,
Godfrey Sykes, was responsible for giving the
plant its common name. Supposedly he got the
name ““Boojum” from a Lewis Carroll poem, “The
Hunting of the Snark”.

The growth rate of the plant in Baja is about one
inch per year, but the University of Arizona plants
have averaged 3 inches of growth per year, with the
tallest still being under 40 feet tall. Mature boojums
can supposedly reach 80 feet “in the wild”. The one
I saw on the Hotline call was perhaps 25 feet tall.
Other United States gardens with adolescent or
mature boojums include San Diego Zoo’s Wild
Animal Park, Tucson’s Ghost Ranch Lodge,

the Phoenix Desert Botanical Garden and the
Huntington Botanical and Rancho Santa Ana
Botanical Gardens in Southern California.

Based on my experience, getting them established
and ready to plant in the ground is “iffy” at best!
Seeds are available at various online venues, but
given the slow growth rate of these plants, this
would not be an option for me! The plants, when
available, are expensive—anything with any size is
said to cost about $1,000 per foot, and the only one
I found on the internet looks to have a trunk about
2 inches tall. It did have some nice branches, so
we’ ll see when it gets here. (Yes, I couldn’t resist,
for $50 and free shipping!). If I had a young child
I'd get them busy planting boojum seeds now in
hopes the sale of the plants later on would help with
college costs.

Boojums grow in winter and are dormant in
summer. They need well drained soil and can
exist on very little water, though weekly watering
in winter is suggested in our rain-starved Mohave
climate. They do well in our horrible soils, but

Wind & Weeds Spring 2024 2 Via Sex

=== New Page ===

(Featured Article -continued from page 2)

I’m fairly certain the faster growth that U of

AZ experienced could be attributed to some
supplemental fertilization and irrigation now and
then. Likewise, the other venues mentioned above
probably do some supplemental hydration and
add a few nutrients in the winter as well. Once

all the leaves fall off in April or so, supplemental
water should be suspended until October or when
the leaves start to reappear. Proper irrigation in
winter results in regularly spaced radial sets of
branches and leaves. A sign that not enough water
was applied in winter to sustain the plant through
the summer is wide, or irregular, spaces between
the branches. Boojums seem to grow better in the
more humid atmosphere of the Sonoran desert, but
this plant in Ft. Mohave has survived for over 30
years despite more arid conditions.

The neglectful watering of our Hotline client didn’t
appear to have adversely affected his Boojum

tree, though the more irregular spacing of the
branches in the top section may be the result
of his irrigation lapses in recent years. It had
not been affected by the strong winds we get
in the Bullhead City/Ft. Mohave area, so it
must have been planted in a spot that was
somewhat wind-protected by the structures

on the property. Like its close relative the
Fouquieria splendens (ocotillo), the plant does
have intermittent flowers, but these are creamy
yellow, not red, and occur in summer or fall.

Although this probably isn’t what anyone
would call a pretty plant, it is one of the most
interesting succulents I’ve ever seen, and it
was fascinating to learn of its relationship

to the University of Arizona. Since the
Fouquieria species has so few members, it was
an unexpected treat to see this variety and do
the research to find out more about it.

Wind & Weeds Spring 202

=== New Page ===

Andrew

It’s been an unprecedented year, to say the least.
We’re a little over a year since all of our lives
dramatically changed. While we aren’t quite back
to “normal,” I see positive signs Mohave County,
Arizona, and the rest of the nation and world are
trending to a better space. I hope all of our Master
Gardener community have remained safe and
healthy. However, we have a little more work to do
before we are able to resume regular activity.

Mohave County Cooperative Extension gained
approval to transition to Phase 2 operations in
the middle of March. Phase 2 allows us to meet
indoors with groups of less than 25 people, and
less than 50 people outdoors. Regardless of
vaccine status, or if you’ve already contracted
Covid-19, face covering and social distancing
mitigation strategies will remain in place.

These are University of Arizona policies, and as
representatives of the University, we will abide by
their policies. We hope to move to Phase 3 when
the Mohave County Covid-19 situation allows.
More information about Cooperative Extension’s
Phased Operational Plan can be found at: https://
extension.arizona.edu/phased-operational-plan.

I’m sure you have all received the news by
now that Amy Nickel, MCCE MG Program
Coordinator, has resigned to take advantage of
a different educational opportunity. Amy was a

’s Corner

great asset to MCCE, and while we will miss her
immensely, we wish her well with her next chapter.
I’m confident she will be just as successful if not
more so with her future opportunities. MCCE will
be looking to fill the vacancy as soon as we can
because as many of you know, I certainly need the
help.

Lastly, I hope many of you have taken advantage

of some of the opportunities Covid-19 has allowed.
I hope many of you used the time to recharge your
batteries, work and improve your own gardens, and
get some of those other projects done you just never
had time to finish. Or not, I learned over the year
some of the projects I “didn’t have time to do” were
really just projects I had little or no desire to do...
like deep clean my house and weed my yard.

It will take us a little while to transition into full
operational mode. It’s expected after over a year
off. But I hope we regain that MG energy soon
and get back to doing what we do best in helping
each other and the citizens of Mohave County with
their gardening challenges. Thank you to those
that continued to answer the calls throughout the
shutdown, I really appreciate the help.

Issued in furtherance of Cooperative Extension work, acts of May 8 and June 30, 1914, in cooperation with the U.S. Department of
Agriculture, Jeffrey C. Silvertooth, Associate Dean & Director, Extension & Economic Development, Division of Agriculture, Life
and Veterinary Sciences, and Cooperative Extension, The University of Arizona. The University of Arizona is an equal opportunity,
affirmative action institution. The University does not discriminate on the basis of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, age,
disability, veteran status, sexual orientation, gender identity, or genetic information in its programs and activities. Persons with a
disability may request reasonable accommodation, such as a sign language interpreter, by contacting the University of Arizona,
Mohave County Cooperative Extension office at (928) 753-3788. Requests should be made as early as possible to allow time to

arrange the accommodation.

a4)

Wind & Weeds Spring 2021 4

USS
a4)

=== New Page ===

Bullhead City Master Gardeners

Debbi Miller, Coordinator
Dennis Lesowsky, Co-coordinator
Bonnie Muir, Secretary

Bill Stillman, Scribe

The first quarter of 2021 has seemed a lot like the
last nine months of 2020. Except for a few Hotline
calls and a recent in-person seminar on Irrigation, the
Bullhead City Master Gardeners have done essen-
tially nothing. We are hoping we have a nucleus of
willing Master Gardeners who remain active when
the University of Arizona Cooperative Extension
reopens and we are able to start our programming in
the community again. The recent vote by the Mo-
have County Supervisors to reduce the restrictions
on library access is a positive sign, and we hope our
Home Garden Days and Library-based workshops
will be allowed in the near future.

The Hotline calls from clients were primarily han-
dled by phone calls and/or emails, and were fairly
routine. The on-site call to the client whose orange
trees were in stress also resulted in the article on his
Boojum tree in this issue of Wind and Weeds. The
sites’ orange tree and other plant problems arose
mostly from improper irrigation so our advice to the
homeowner was simply giving instructions on how
to assess the water needs of various plants on the
property and irrigate accordingly. This same edu-
cational process was offered to other phone/email
clients as well, since all the other issues this quarter
seemed to be water-related also. Wind protection
was also discussed a bit in some instances since we
have had more than our fair share of days with heavy
winds this winter.

Bill Stillman had been invited by the Mo-

have Community College (Kingman) and the
Kingman Community Garden (DIG) to demon-
strate and instruct the attendees on setting up and
using an irrigation system. In assistance for this
demonstration were Leroy Jackson and Debbie
Miller, Master Gardeners from Bullhead City.
The demonstration included drip irrigation and
the materials needed to set up a drip system, us-
ing and assembling PVC piping, how to use a
soil probe and how to determine plant irrigation
needs. Also discussed were water movement in
various soils, root zones, how to estimate irriga-
tion needs throughout the year and automation
of an irrigation system. The attendees asked lots
of questions. We were prepared for those ques-
tions. We were not prepared for the very nippy
Kingman weather, however, as shown by our
lightweight Bullhead winter attire in the accompa-
nying picture! The MCC and DIG attendees were
very enthusiastic and receptive, despite the wind
and temperatures.

Let us hope there will be more activity to report
by June!

Via RS Wind & Weeds Spring 2024 5 Via RS

=== New Page ===

Kingman Master Gardeners

Linda L Reddick, Coordinator
Melissa Palmer, Co-Coordinator

Happy Spring to everyone. I am sure we will all
enjoy the spring flowers and hopefully the wild
flowers.

What an unconventional way to start 2021 - strange
weather, hardly any much needed rain and still on
lock down.

For many of us I doubt we have actually had enough
continual chill hours sufficient for our fruit trees.
Then we experienced fruit trees blooming early and
within the next few days a number of cold snowy
days, oops, there go the blossoms, no blossoms, no
fruit.

Due to the virus we have had very few client calls,
and most of the ones we received were new comers
to Arizona. The need to get back to having our
workshops is definitely obvious. Most people do not
understand they can not plant here the way the did
in Virginia, Oregon or Florida.

There is a light at the end of the tunnel. We are
planning to participate in the Home & Garden Expo.
All of us are definitely excited for getting back into
the groove and educating people. With the cost of
groceries on the rise, more and more people are trying
to grow their own fruits and vegetables, according to
the major seed companies. We will be there to answer
questions, give advice, and teach all who are willing
to listen and learn.

Hang in there, we are family, we can overcome
whatever comes our way.

Looking forward to Spring
Happy Growing

Linda Reddick

Kingman Area Coordinator

Mohave County Master Gardener Spring 2021 Calendar

April

April 23, 24 & 25:
April 23 & 24:
April 25:

Kingman Home & Garden Expo, Mohave County Fairgrounds Kingman AZ
10:00 AM to 6:00 PM
10:00 AM to 4:00 PM

Spring 2021 Wind & Weeds Assembled by Shelley, Master Gardener

Wind & Weeds Spring 2021 6

=== New Page ===

Lake Havasu City Master Gardeners

Sharon Gomez, Coordinator
Jamie Zimmerman, Co-coordinator

Happy Spring All! Easter is fast approaching and
not far behind comes SUMMER!! Let’s hope
Mother Nature takes heart on Arizona and doesn’t
leave us with another summer from hell!

Like most Mohave County Master Gardeners, Lake
Havasu has not been able to hold any events so far.
Covid numbers are beginning to look better, so let’s
all hope we’ll be up and running real soon! I also
read the Mohave County Libraries may be opening
soon!

We continue to receive numerous hotline calls and
emails asking for assistance. Since July 2020, we’ve
had over 50 calls on a variety of subjects. The
greatest number received has been about irrigation.
In Lake Havasu, the main advice from landscape
companies given to residents is to water twice a day
for 10 minutes, each time, every day. Or, the advice
has been to water 20 to 30 minutes twice a day all
year! REALLY?!!

We have many questions about citrus: fertilizing,
planting, and watering. Last summer played havoc
with so many citrus trees due to the extreme heat.
Then again, watering was the main issue as well as
the proper fertilization schedule.

Lake Havasu is a relatively young city and we are
now beginning to see the impact of large trees and
palms that were planted too close to structures,
cement patios, driveways, and pools. We are
beginning to receive calls about patios heaving,
foundations cracking, and in one instance, a pool
wall starting to cave because of large Sissoo and
palm roots.

A couple of interesting situations occurred that

we were not able to offer help. One woman had a
six-foot sago in her entryway she wanted to give

a4)

Wind & Weeds Spring 2024 7

away, but needed removed. The other situation
was a large 15-foot ocotillo which needed to be
removed to make way for a driveway. The caller/
neighbor wanted to try to move it, but the size
and cost was prohibitive. It was suggested the
caller would be better off purchasing her own
ocotillo if she still desired one.

A variety of Lake Havasu Master Gardeners
have stepped up to answer many other inquiries.
From how and what vegetables to grow in our
low desert, cactus identification, along with
diseases and pests attacking plants. The real
challenge continues to be the inability to go out
on house calls for first-hand information about
the resident’s concerns and questions.

Havasu MGs have been spending numerous
hours joining webinars and various educational
online seminars to further their knowledge of
gardening. Subjects on veggie gardens, pruning,
cultivating spring flowers and pretty much
anything sent our way from the Extension office.

Many of our Master Gardeners have been
working in their gardens to spruce up or repair
the damage done from last summer. Tammy

H. had to remove lantana, a citrus tree, an old
bougainvillea, and three pygmy date palms
planted too close to the house. Steve G. lives

in a huge condo complex where he heads up the
landscape maintenance. This is no small task,
but he and his trusty helpers tackle projects large
and small — separating agave pups, pruning
shrubs and trees, and installing new plants

where others didn’t survive the summer. Also,

a number of large sissoo trees were removed

due to their invasive root system destroying
foundations. Plus, he makes certain the irrigation
is always up and running correctly. I (Sharon G.)
continue to add to the landscape design of my
l-acre property. Adding dirt mounds, irrigation,
boulders, cacti and gravel along the east side.
Plus, “planting” more metal art, saguaro ribs, and

a4)

=== New Page ===

(LHC Continued from page 7)

cow skulls than plants to cut down on water usage.
Spring has also included the normal pruning of
lantana, yellow, red, and Mexican bird of paradise,
trimming of dead agave leaves, feeding citrus

trees and flowering shrubs. Irrigation needed to be
checked and replaced with new bubblers and heads.
I also have my own propagation nursery that has
grown so large I’m thinking about having a plant
sale. It takes over two hours just to water the pots
by hand!

Our very talented Carol Bruch created a lovely

gift to celebrate Dan Albert’s departure from the
Coordinator position he held for seven and one-half
years. Carol is gifted in so many ways and one of
them is arts and crafts. She did a mosaic of tiles
and different specialty items on a clay pot. The life
and hobbies of Dan’s were depicted on the pot with

colorful, iridescent tiles and various miniatures.
His life as a Master Gardener, his years spent in
Vietnam, and his love of off-road exploring the
Mohave Desert were are shown on the pot.

I think you will agree Carol created a masterpiece
for Dan to cherish for the rest of his life. I’m
picturing this pot with a sharkskin agave
somewhere around his pool for him to enjoy as he
floats!

Now, Summer is fast approaching. I’m hoping
and praying for a less intense summer with (dare
I hope?!) some monsoon rain coming our way.
What have you been doing with your Spring
Garden Time? I’m always looking for new and
different ideas to apply to my garden!

Mice & Rabbits, Oh My!!
By Gail Key, Emeritus Lake Havasu Master Gardener

Those damnable mice! The war is upgrading to

all out war! Sprinkled cinnamon and peppermint
oil on cotton balls since they did not know that the
mothballs and Irish Spring were there to chase them
away! Not so much in the yard, but in the front
patio where I have my fairy garden. They like to
dig their holes behind the shelving making pretty
big mounds for such little guys. So, I shove the
cotton balls down their holes as far as I’m willing
to go since the tunnels seem to be very long. A big
mound in the middle of the town square is too hard
for the fairies to navigate over!

Then those damnable rabbits! I’m after them
with more fencing which is making the yard look

like Fort Knox. Instead of individual fences for
each plant the new fencing is now corrals with
multiple plants, a boulder or two and some sort of
decoration.

What seems to be working best is Hardware
Cloth 24’ H 25’ L 4” squares. So far the whole
roll is being used for each corral. In the past, I
have tried chicken wire, but it falls down without
some other fencing to support it. I have also tried
a green fencing with square holes so large the
rabbits make a game of going in and out! The
wars continue! Now on to the irrigation system --
another war to be fought!

Wind & Weeds Spring 2021 8

=== New Page ===

Bruch Mosaic Pot
by Carol Bruch, Lake Havasu Master Garder

Dan Alberts stepped down as LHC Coordinator

at the end of 2020. Master Gardener Carol Bruch
created a one of a kind mosaic pot commemorating
his service to the program, as well as celebrating
some of his other interests. Here is her explanation
of the theme and creation of this pot:

A portion is representative of Dan’s military service,
he was part of the flight crew for a Chinook 47
helicopter, for the Army during the Vietnam War.
That portion of the pot has the looped ribbon with
red/white & blue rhinestones. Below that is the
metal Army emblem & under that is the Army
symbol of a star inside a circle. The gold circle was
a lid to a potpourri dish and the star was a metal
necklace pendant. I found the Army symbol & the
commemorative Vietnam coin at our local Veteran’s
Thrift store. The CH-47 was created from cut up
license plate letters & numbers that was donated by
Steve Gissendanner for the project.

Wind & Weeds Spring 2024 9

Another portion of the theme was of course the
gardening section. I found metal alpha lettering
at Hobby Lobby which spells out LHC Master
Gardener Coordinator, Mailbox metal lettering
created the years of service 2013 - 2020. Dan
has battled rattlesnakes in his yard, so there is a
rattlesnake I found at Hobby Lobby, in addition
to that a pewter roadrunner, metal quail & a key
chain with a scorpion. The symbol of Arizona

is the Saguaro, so that is added with a Christmas
ornament of a Saguaro in a pot. In his retirement
he’ll spend more time exploring the desert with
his VW dune buggy so that is also included using
a Matchbox metal dune buggy toy. A small dish
showing the AZ mountains with an Indigenous
person and his brown & white paint horse is on
another side of the pot.

=== New Page ===

(Mosaic Continued from page 9)

I cut up, with my wet tile saw, 7 earth colored
saltillo tiles to form most of the body of the

pot, then added red mosaic glass tiles, turquoise
ceramic mosaic tiles & brown ceramic tiles to
form the lip of the pot. Sections of the pot are
covered with broken pieces of pottery dishes

& glass beads using an outdoor rated liquid
adhesive. I try not to use any acrylic, plastic, sea
shells or other items that tend to deteriorate in
our Desert sun, especially if the item will be left
outdoors. Next, I grout between objects with a
sanded grout. After grouting has dried, I coated
the inside & bottom of the pot with a water sealant
and insert another plastic pot as a liner. That way,
the constant watering of any plants put in the pot
won’t deteriorate the terra cotta, & cause the tiles
to loosen & fall off.

When I teach classes for this art form, I typically
tell my students to plan on 4 hours for creating
the design & gluing on the pot and another 4
hours for the grouting. However, that doesn’t
take into account the time to find & purchase

the pieces going into the pot’s design. I typically
collect jewelry, pottery, belt buckles, etc. at garage
sales, thrift stores and estate sales & have quite
a collection already built up from which to use
for the projects. This pot insert makes it easier
to transplant or divide any plants without the
potential of harming the mosaic pot.

Wind & Weeds Spring 202 10 Z|