# Document 114323

COLLEGE OF AGRICULTURE
AND LIFE SCIENCES

®
COOPERATIVE EXTENSION
THE UNIVERSITY | Arizona Pest Management Center
OF ARIZONA

Potential Pest of Arizona Pecans: Rapid
Communication

Peter C. Ellsworth, Naomi Pier, W. Eugene Hall, Univ. of Arizona &
David Haviland, Univ. of California Kern Co. Cooperative Extension

Amirid plant bug has been observed in high numbers on the catkins of
some central Arizona pecan orchards. Multiple growers report this for
the first time and have expressed concerns about potential impacts to
the crop. This rapid communication is designed to provide the limited
knowledge we have about this potential pest. Growers are encouraged
to review this information with their pest control advisor to determine
what action, if any, is required.

1) What is this bug?

The insect appears to be a species of clouded plant bug in the genus
Neurocolpus. There are multiple species of Neurocolpus in the western
US., including the buckeye bug, NV. Jongirostris, that is a known pest of
pistachios in California. Several species of Neurocolpus occur in Arizona,
each with thickened first segments of their antennae. Those in pecans
are superficially similar in size and shape to a Lygus bug. They even
have a pale-colored, heart-shaped scutellum on their back, similar to a
Lygus bug. The first segment of the antenna in our recently collected
specimens from Arizona, shown below, have thicker tips and the hind
tibiae lack a medial stripe.

2) Are these bugs damaging pecans?

These bugs have been concentrated on the catkins, where it is
presumed that they are feeding. While this has the potential to reduce
the amount of pollen, it is unlikely that the reductions would be so
significant as to reduce yield. The primary concern is that these bugs
may move from the catkins to young nuts, as occurs in pistachios in
California, where probing of young fruit before the shell hardens
causes young nuts to abort.

In California, Neurocolpus has never been shown to cause damage to
almonds, walnuts or pecans, and is not included in the UC Pest
Management Guidelines for any of these three crops. All three crops
are grown in close proximity to pistachio orchards, including along the
foothills of the Central Valley where California buckeye trees serve as a
native host for N. longirostris.

We are uncertain if the bugs being found on catkins will shortly
become irrelevant to pecan growers, or if Arizona's experience will be
closer to that of pistachios in California. For that reason, growers should

Pecan catkin infested with Neurocolpus spp. bugs in a central Arizona.

make close observations in the orchard, particularly as young nuts
form.

3) What to look for?

In California, PCAs monitor young nuts with a beat sheet. Look for bugs
and aborted nutlets. Inspect the nutlets closely. If aborted due to
feeding by Neurocolpus, you should see a dark spot where the insect's
mouthparts were inserted, and a sunken area on the surface of the fruit.
These feeding marks are critical in distinguishing nuts that drop due to
insects as compared to natural shed. In pistachios, PCAs watch the level
of nut drop closely, because pistachios naturally set many more nuts
than they can retain. Even low to moderate amounts of aborted nuts
very early in the season are of little concern, because the tree naturally
retains sufficient nuts that are healthy. Once the shells harden, small
bugs like Neurocolpus are of no concern. The presence of a shell and
hull on almonds, and a husk on walnuts, is likely why these crops are
not injured.

=== New Page ===

Q—Thickened 1st
_@™ segment (

“<@— Tibial stripe \

a

a
Tip of 1st segment
thicker than base

No stripe in middle ,
of hind tibia

Example Neurocolpus spp. from Arizona including two specimens (right) of the species currently being seen in area pecan orchards. Specimens on left, © 2009
Margarethe Brummerman, used with permission from, https://bugquide.net/node/view/272454 and https://buqquide.net/node/view/266272

Thus far, PCAs have been reporting these insects in central Arizona,
primarily on Bradley, Western, and Wichita varieties. Distribution in the
field has been patchy, which is common for migratory insects that move
into an orchard. In California, the greatest problems with small bugs
like Neurocolpus occur when orchards are near native host plants that
harbor the pest, or where the bugs are established in a cover crop or
other ground cover that is accidentally mowed at the exact same time
that small nuts are susceptible.

4) What to do about them? Is spraying necessary?

There is no easy answer here. If treatments are needed, standard
practice in California pistachios is to apply a pyrethroid. See the link to
University of California's guide given below.

Permethrin has a very short residual but gives knockdown control of
buckeye bug in pistachio. Bifenthrin or lambda-cyhalothrin provide
longer residual control useful in addressing continued immigration but
at greater risks to biological control.

Asa mirid, we can also consider what we know abouta sister species in
cotton, Lygus hesperus. In cotton, Carbine and Transform are the most
popular control agents. Both are labeled for use in pecans-observe
label restrictions carefully. However, we simply cannot be certain what
level of control is possible, if any, with either product. Transform has
done well in controlling other plant bug species the size of Lygus or
smaller, including evidence of control of the clouded plant bug, N.
nubilus, in cotton in Tennessee. The benefit of using a more selective
option is their safety to natural enemies and pollinators. These two
products are also useful in aphid control. The pyrethroids are broad
spectrum and this early season use could harm beneficials, which

This material is based upon work that is supported by the National Institute of Food
and Agriculture, U.S. Department of Agriculture, under award number
2017-70006-27145. Any recommendations, services, or organizations that are
mentioned, shown, or indirectly implied in this publication do not imply
endorsement by the USDA or the University of Arizona.

might set-up the grower for later problems including the flaring of
pecan aphids.

Integrated pest management in any crop requires efforts to properly
identify pests and levels of damage they are causing, coupled with
consideration of any potential negative impacts on biological control,
pollinators and the environment, before spraying. Because much of
this information is still under development, PCAs are advised to make
careful observations, compare notes with neighbors, and share
information on this evolving issue. This is not an easy decision for a
grower to make, but should be done with full understanding of what is
at risk for each material and for doing nothing at all.

4/30/21

—_ Ki >h—

A A

PE NT

Cc R
NN

Other Resources:

Beede, R.H., Bentley, W.J., Daane, K.M., Haviland, D.R. 2014. UC IPM Pest
Management Guidelines: Pistachio, UC ANR Publication 3461. https://
www2.ipm.ucanr.edu/agriculture/pistachio/Small-Plant-Bugs/

Genus Neurocolpus. For pictures of bugs from this genus, see BugGuide.net at:
https://buqquide.net/node/view/7460/bgpage

Henry, Thomas J., Kim, K. C. 1984. Genus Neurocolpus Reuter (Heteroptera:
Miridae): Taxonomy. Transactions of the American Entomological Society. 110 (1): 1-
75. https://www.jstor.org/stable/pdf/25078333.pdf

APDF of this publication is available on-line at: https://acis.cals.arizona.edu/docs/
default-source/ipm-shorts/Neurocolpus