# Document 114920

THE UNIVERSITY OF ARIZONA

Cooperative Extension

JA,

az1851

September 2020

Zeolite Application in Crop Production:
Importance to Soil Nutrient, Soil Water, Soil Health, and

Environmental Pollution Management
Isaac K. Mpanga, Hattie Braun and James Walworth

Introduction

According to the United States Geological Service (USGS),
zeolites (Fig. 1) are hydrated aluminosilicates of alkaline
and alkaline-earth metals with very porous structure.
Zeolites are used as pet litter, in animal feed, in wastewater
treatment, and as soil amendments. Identified about 200
years ago, there are over 40 different types that include
analcime, chabazite, clinoptilolite, erionite, ferrierite,
heulandite, laumontite, mordenite, and phillipsite. Those
commonly used in crop production as soil conditioners are
clinoptilolite, erionite, and mordenite. Zeolites are mostly
present in soils and sediments, with clinoptilolite as the
most abundant type. In 2019, the United States had nine
zeolite mines producing an estimated 98,000 tons of natural
zeolites, a 14% increase from 2018. Chabazite is mined in
Arizona (Hyde, 1982; Flanagan, 2020) and clinoptilolite
in New Mexico (Hyde, 1982). Although reported to have
benefits as soil conditioners and growth media, these are
less common than other uses. This bulletin gives a summary
of the benefits of zeolite soil conditioners with respect
to nutrient management and water retention, provides
suggested application rates, and discusses challenges
associated with the use of zeolite soil conditioners.

Figure 1: Zeolite (clinoptilolite) in different particle sizes.

Benefits of zeolites as a soil conditioner
and growth media

Zeolite soil conditioners or amendments may provide
many benefits such as improved water infiltration and
reduced surface water run-off and nutrient leaching (Fig. 2).
Benefits from zeolite application could translate to increased
yield, more efficient use of nutrient inputs, and reduction in
environmental pollution of nitrogen (N) and phosphorus
(P) in bodies of water, as well as reduction in greenhouse
gas emissions (Fig. 2). The high cation exchange capacity
(CEC) and porosity of zeolites allows them to absorb and
trap greenhouse gases such as methane (CH,) and carbon
dioxide (CO,).

Effects of zeolites on soil physical properties and
soil water holding capacity

The high porosity of zeolite structure helps improve soil
structure and increase aeration without clogging soil pores.
Because of their porous nature zeolites can hold more than
their weight in water, and in soil can act as a reservoir
providing a prolonged water supply. Zeolites can improve
water infiltration into soil, and speed re-wetting and lateral
spread of irrigation water in the root zone (Nahklietal., 2017).

=== New Page ===

B. Soil with zeolite application

Precipitation

Low greenhouse
gas emissions

Zeolite

s

Increase water Infiltration

Increase water holding capacity

Reduce water run-off

Increase nutrient retention and

availability in soil

* Reduce greenhouse gas
emissions

* Reduce salt concentration in
soils

* Increase crop yield

* Soil pH increase

Water infiltration

A. Soil without zeolite application

+oe

wudy a
Water Run-off 2 3

Water infiltration

Figure 2: Benefits associated with using zeolites as a soil conditioner/amendment. A-left (soil with zeolite
application) and B-right (soil without zeolite application). The red arrows show potential effects of zeolites on
greenhouse gas emissions levels (a thicker arrow means more emissions). The black dots and arrows represent
water, while the grey dots represent zeolite (modified from Nahkli et al., 2017).

Improved soil water holding capacity (WHC) is important
for crop production, especially in arid and semi-arid regions
where it increases water efficiency from irrigation. For
example, soil treatment with the zeolite mordenite, which
has a WHC of 121% (holding 1.21 times its own weight in
water), increased soil water infiltration by 7-30% ona gentle
slope and up to 50% on a steep slope, and reduced run-off
after precipitation (Xiubin and Zhanbin, 2001). Also, mixing
clinoptilolite, another zeolite, at a rate of 10% by weight to
a sandy soil resulted in a 20% increase in WHC compared
to untreated soil (Bigelow et al., 2001). Zeolite application
could be combined with irrigation technology for improved
water use efficiencies in the field, especially in dry regions
(Mpanga and Idowu, 2020).

Effects of zeolites on soil nutrient availability to
plants

Due to the high porosity and CEC of zeolites, they are
able to increase soil CEC, therefore increasing soils’ ability
to capture and hold nutrients such as ammonium (NH, *)
and potassium (K*). Naturally occurring zeolites have very
high CEC ranging from 100 to 200 cmol.,/ kg (Inglezakis
et al., 2015; Ming and Allen, 2001). This is roughly five to
ten times that of typical Arizona soils. Zeolites can also act
as slow-release agents for NH,* and urea, which reduces
nitrification and subsequent nitrogen loss, and retains
nitrogen in the plant root zone longer. Incorporation of 10%
(by weight) of clinoptilolite with ammonium sulfate reduced
leaching of ammonium by 99% (Huang and Petrovic, 1994).
In another study, 5% by weight of two zeolites (erionite

2 The University of Arizona Cooperative Extension

and clinoptilolite) were added to loamy sand and fertilized
with 200 mg/kg of ammonium sulfate. When the soils
were leached with water, ammonium leaching in the soil
amended with erionite was reduced by 93%, and by 83%
in the clinoptilolite amended soil (MacKown and Tucker,
1985).

Effects of zeolites on soil health and
environmental pollutant management

Zeolites could improve soil health indirectly by
increasing soil water infiltration, improving soil structure,
and reducing erosion and nutrient leaching. Zeolites can
reduce pollution risks to water bodies by capturing and
holding contaminants in their porous structure. Zeolite
application can reduce ammonia (NH,) gas emissions
during composting by capturing and holding NH,*, and
preventing it from converting to NH,, which is a volatile
greenhouse gas (Madrini et al., 2016; Wang et al., 2012). In
Arizona, manure use increased by 30% from 2012 to 2017
(Mpanga et al., 2020), so integrating zeolites into manure
and compost applications in fields could be a sustainable
way to manage losses, reduce associated pollutants, and
improve soil health.

Yield increase

Yield increases in crops as a result of zeolite application
with either synthetic or organic fertilizers are reported in
many crops, which could be associated with the benefits
of improved soil structure, soil WHC, and enhanced soil
nutrient conditions. For example, Aghaalikhani et al. (2011)

=== New Page ===

added clinoptilolite to canola growing in sandy loam
fertilized with 240 Ib/ac of nitrogen in the form of urea.
Canola planted in soils receiving 1.35, 2.7, or 4.05 tons/
acre showed 2.9%, 8.3%, or 29.3% higher seed yields when
compared to canola growing in unamended soil. However,
soil amendment costs may be high as the current market
price of zeolites is $50 to $300 per ton (USGS, 2020).

Zeolite application in the field

Many factors such as soil texture type, water, fertilizer,
and spreading capabilities affect applications of zeolites,
which makes it difficult to give specific application rates
that work for all. Appropriate application rates should be
determined using test plots before applying on a broad
scale. For example, on a test plot of 100 ft?, apply 2.5 to 5 Ib
to simulate a 3.5 to 4.0% application rate. For applications
with compost and manure, adding about 5 to 20% of the
total volume to the composting pile will increase nutrient
availability in the compost and also reduce NH, and nitrous
oxide (N,O) greenhouse gas emissions (Wang et al. 2012).

Challenges to zeolite use for soil
amendment

The major challenge with zeolite application in alkaline
Arizona soils could be potential increases in soil pH. Some
studies have reported increases soil pH although others
reported a decrease, so check its effects on your soil pH in
test plots before applying to a larger area. Applications to
compost or manure are less likely to cause unacceptable soil
pH changes. Removing zeolite from the soil after application
is not practical, so it’s very important to initially test for
effectiveness in very small areas of land. Input cost could
be another problem, especially for large-scale operations.
However, a plan for yearly applications of small quantities
could build up zeolites economically over time.

Conclusion

The use of zeolites in crop production may offer benefits
relating to improving soil nutrient retention, soil water
infiltration, reduced water run-off, increased soil WC, and
crop yield potentials. Other benefits include reducing salt
and heavy metals leaching from soil and greenhouse gas
emissions. However, the use of zeolites in crop production
has the potential for increasing soil pH from undesirable
levels, and application of zeolites may increase production
cost. More investigations on zeolite application in crops
could lead to fertilization strategies that will reduce
application costs and effects on soil pH.

References

1. Aghaalikhani, M., Gholamhoseini, M., Dolatabadian,
A., Khodaei-Joghan, A. & Asilan, K. S., (2012). Zeolite
influences on nitrate leaching, nitrogen-use efficiency,
yield and yield components of canola in sandy soil,
Archives of Agronomy and Soil Science, 58:10, 1149-1169,
DOI: 10.1080 /03650340.2011.572876.

2. Bigelow, C. A., Bowman, D. C., Cassel, D. K., & Rufty,
T. W, (2001). Creeping bentgrass response to inorganic
soil amendments and mechanically induced subsurface
drainage and aeration. Crop Science, 41(3), 797-805.

3. Flanagan, D. M., (2020). U.S. Geological Survey, Mineral
Commodity Summaries, January 2020.

4. Huang, Z., & Petrovic, A. (1994). Clinoptilolite zeolite
influence on nitrate leaching and nitrogen use efficiency
in simulated sand-based golf greens. Journal of
Environmental Quality, 23(6), 1190-1194.

5. Hyde, T (1982). Zeolite deposits in the Gila and San Simon
Valleys of Arizona and New Mexico. (In) Industrial rocks
and minerals of the Southwest (Compiled by George S.
Austin). A symposium on industrial rocks and minerals
of the Southwest, Albuquerque, New Mexico.

6. Inglezakis, V., Stylianou, M., Loizidou, M., & Zorpas,
A. (2015). Experimental studies and modeling of
clinoptilolite and vermiculite fixed beds for Mn2, Zn2,
and Cr3 removal. Desalination and Water Treatment,
1-13.

7. Madrini, B., Shibusawa S., Kojima Y., and Hosaka, S.
(2016). Effects of natural zeolite on ammonia emissions
of leftover food-rice hulls composting at initial stages
of the thermophilic process. Journal of Agriculture
Meteorology, 72(1), 12-19.

8. MacKown, C., & Tucker, T. (1985). Ammonium nitrogen
movement in a coarse-textured soil amended with
zeolite. Soil Science Society of America Journal, 49(1),
235-238.

9. Ming, D. W., & Allen, E. R. (2001). Use of natural zeolites
in agronomy, horticulture and environmental soil

remediation. Reviews in Mineralogy and Geochemistry,
45(1), 619-654.

10. Mpanga, I. K., Neumann, G., Schuch, U. K., & Schalau,
J. (2020). Sustainable agriculture practices as a driver for
increased harvested cropland among large-scale growers
in arizona: A paradox for small-scale growers. Advanced
Sustainable Systems, 4(4), https://doi.org/10.1002/
adsu.201900143

11.Mpanga IK, Idowu OJ (2020). A decade of irrigation
water use trends in Southwest USA: The role of
irrigation technology, best management practices,
and outreach education programs, Agricultural Water
Management. 243, 106438, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
agwat.2020.106438.

The University of Arizona Cooperative Extension 3

=== New Page ===

12.Nakhli, S.A.A.,, Delkash, M., Bakhshayesh, B.E.,
& Kazemian, H (2017). Application of zeolites for
sustainable agriculture: a review on water and nutrient
retention. Water Air Soil Pollution, 228(12), https: / / doi.
org /10.1007/s11270-017-3649-1.

13.Szerement, J., Ambrozewicz-Nita, A., Kedziora, K.,
& Piasek, J. (2014). Use of zeolite in agriculture and
environmental protection. A short review. BicHuk
Hawionaabuoro yHisepcurery (781), 172-177.

14. USGS (United States Geological Survey). 2020. National
Minerals Information Center. https:/ /pubs.usgs.gov/
periodicals /mcs2020/ mcs2020-zeolites.pdf, accessed
August 20, 2020.

15.Wang J. Z., Hu Z. Y, Zhou X. Q., An Z. Z., Gao J. F,
Liu X. N., Jiang L. L., Lu J., Kang X. M., Li, M., Hao,
Y. B., & Kardol P. (2012). Effects of reed straw, zeolite,
and superphosphate amendments on ammonia and
greenhouse gas emissions from stored duck manure. J.
Environ. Qual. 41, doi:10.2134/ jeq2011.0373

16. Xiubin, H., & Zhanbin, H. (2001). Zeolite application for
enhancing water infiltration and retention in loess soil.
Resources, Conservation and Recycling, 34(1), 45-52.

THE UNIVERSITY OF ARIZONA

Cooperative Extension

THe UNIVERSITY OF ARIZONA
CoLLeGE oF AGRICULTURE AND LIFE SCIENCES
Tucson, Arizona 85721

AUTHORS

Isaac K. MPaNcA
Area Associate Agent - Commercial Horticulture/Small Acreage

Hattie BRAUN
Director, County Extension

James WaLworTH
Extension Specialist and Professor of Soil Science

CONTACT

Isaac K. MPANGA
mpangai@email.arizona.edu

This information has been reviewed
by University faculty.
extension.arizona.edu/pubs/az1851-2020.pdf

Other titles from Arizona Cooperative Extension can be found at:
extension.arizona.edu/pubs

Any products, services or organizations that are mentioned, shown or indirectly implied in this publication do not imply endorsement by The University of Arizona.

Issued in furtherance of Cooperative Extension work, acts of May 8 and June 30, 1914, in cooperation with the U.S. Department of Agriculture, Jeffrey C. Silvertooth, Associate Dean & Director, Extension
& Economic Development, Division of Agriculture, Life and Veterinary Sciences, and Cooperative Extension, The University of Arizona.

The University of Arizona is an equal opportunity, affirmative action institution. The University does not discriminate on the basis of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, age, disability, veteran status,
sexual orientation, gender identity, or genetic information in its programs and activities.

4 The University of Arizona Cooperative Extension