# Document 114942

THE UNIVERSITY
. OF ARIZONA.

College of Agriculture
and Life Sciences

AZ1521

August 2010

INTEGRATED PEST MANAGEMENT
FOR THE HOME GARDEN

Stacey Bealmear

Integrated Pest Management (IPM) is a science-based approach
to managing pests using a variety of safe, sustainable and
effective tactics against common garden pests, which
may include insects, weeds, diseases, birds and rodents.
This publication will focus on insect pests. IPM takes
advantage of a variety of approaches to pest management,
often controlling pests through non chemical means.
Pesticides, when needed, are selected based on their
ability to target problem pests and to minimize impact on
beneficial organisms, people and the environment. Focus
is on developing an overall management strategy, not just
controlling one type of pest. Reduction of pest problems
through proper plant selection and placement is a key
principle in IPM. This means selecting proper plants for
your climate zone and placing them in the appropriate spot
in the garden. For example, if a plant is labeled for shade,
placing it in a shady location could lead to the prevention
of pest problems.

The first step in IPM is scouting for pests. This is a simple and
effective technique for detecting pest insects before they get
out of hand. It is simply done by walking through your yard
or garden and looking for problems. During the growing
season this should be done weekly for vegetables, every one
to two weeks for flowers and trees and then once a month
during dormant periods. While scouting, look for signs of
plant stress and damage like wilt, yellow leaves, defoliation
or distortion of leaves, chewed holes or leaf edges, webbing,
and dead plant material. Examine plants closely for any
signs of insect pests on leaves, undersides of leaves, stems
or flower buds. Traps can also be helpful in catching and
identifying pest problems. These traps include pheromone
traps, yellow sticky traps (Figure 1), and pitfall traps. If
insects are found during scouting the next step is to figure
out what it is.

The most important step in IPM is the correct identification
of pests. Sometimes beneficial insects are mistaken as
pests. Also, certain pest species may require distinct control
measures. Most insects progress through a series of growth
stages from egg to immature to adult and not all treatments
are successful for all pests or life stages. Identification can be

STACEY BEALMEAR

Figure 1. Yellow sticky trap used to scout for pest insects.

accomplished in different ways such as using guide books, the
internet, Cooperative Extension publications, or taking a live
or well preserved specimen to your local extension office for
identification by an expert. Once the pest has been correctly
identified, learn about the life cycle to determine when is the
best time to control the pest. Not all insects are susceptible
to control tactics through all of their lifecycle. Many are
more susceptible during immature stages such as larvae or
caterpillars. Once a pest is detected, treatment is an individual
decision; not everyone can tolerate the same amount of injury
to plants or insects in their garden. Insects may be present
but not causing serious damage to the plant or harvestable
portions. Educating yourself is important because many plants

=== New Page ===

RON HAY

Figure 2. Ladybeetle larvae attacking aphid.

can often tolerate a number of pests. They might even come
back stronger and prettier because small amounts of injury
can stimulate plant growth.

IPM Control Strategies

There are four general types of approaches that can be used
to prevent or control pests:

¢ Cultural control
¢ Physical control
¢ Biological control
¢ Chemical control

Cultural control measures emphasize modifying the natural
environment to reduce the potential for pest problems. One
example is keeping your yard sanitary by removing old plant
material, infested plants, and weeds that may harbor pests.
Optimizing plant health also falls into this category, including
proper plant care such as adequate watering, fertilizing and
pruning to reduce plant stress. One of the most effective
cultural controls when planning a garden is to carefully choose
varieties that are resistant to insect damage.

Physical controls are activities that physically remove or block
a pest from your plants. It is best to use these controls when
pest populations are low. Examples include spraying plants
with water to dislodge pests, using barriers such as row covers
or nets, insect traps and soil cultivation. Physical control can
also be used for pests that build nests or feed in aggregation.
For example, pruning out the branches containing tents made
by web building caterpillars, or sawflies that feed in groups
on isolated branches of a plant can reduce pest populations
and damage.

Biological control is the use of beneficial insects, also called
natural enemies, to reduce insect pest numbers. There are two
different kinds of biological control: conservation biological
control and augmentative biological control. Conservation
biological control is the process of attracting and keeping natural
enemies in a garden by providing them with needed resources
such as nectar and pollen, alternative prey, water, and nesting
sites, or refuge with favorable conditions to sustain them.

2 The University of Arizona Cooperative Extension

STACEY BEALMEAR

STACEY BEALMEAR

Figure 3. Aphidius wasp hunting for aphids to lay eggs in.

Figure 4. Swollen aphid body after an Aphidius wasp has laid an egg in it.

Augmentative biological control occurs when you buy natural
enemies and release them into a home garden. For example
many people purchase lady beetles for this purpose. While
lady beetles are great natural enemies, the adults have the
habit of flying away from their intended target when released.
Lady beetle larvae (Figure 2), green lace wing larvae and some
mite species are better predators that will stay near the release
site and prey on insect pests. Parasitic wasps such as Aphidius
species (Figure 3) are also useful natural enemies. They lay
their eggs inside aphids, where the wasp larva develops,
killing the aphid and causing the body to swell (Figure 4).
When the adult wasp emerges it attacks more aphids and the
cycle continues. To encourage future colonization by natural
enemies, it is important to avoid using insecticides that may
also kill the natural enemies.

Chemical control is used in IPM but other options should be
explored before turning to pesticides. Many times, using a
pesticide can cause more harm than good. Many pesticides kill
natural enemies along with the pest, and pest populations tend

=== New Page ===

to rebound much more quickly than their natural enemies. This
can lead to a “pesticide treadmill” where gardeners are trying
to stay one step ahead of the pests. Understanding the pest’s
life cycle and knowing where the pest is living and feeding
is vital for successful chemical control. Proper placement,
timing, and use of effective application methods will save time
and money and more effectively control the pest. It is also
important to research your pesticide choices and to choose a
product that is less persistent in the environment and affects
only the targeted insect pest, leaving more natural enemies in
place to help control pests. For help with pesticide selection,
contact your local Cooperative Extension office. Treatment
should not be planned according to a calendar. For example,
if you suspect aphids will attack your roses in a certain month
because they appeared in the same month last year, make sure
they are actually there this year by scouting the area in question
before deciding if a treatment is necessary.

Integrated Pest Management is an approach that considers
many aspects of plant health, from planning and planting to
pest identification and treatment. A range of management tools
and tactics (not only pesticides) can be used to control pests
while minimizing risks to your plants, to people, pets and the
environment. Record keeping is important to record successes
and failures. Information that should be recorded are, planting
date, bloom time, harvest time (if applicable), pest occurrence
and damage, and how pest problems were resolved. Educating
yourself about insect pests and keeping current on available
management strategies is vital since the specific tools of IPM
continuously changing with technology.

IPM References and Pest Identification
IPM in Vegetables Texas A&M University: vegipm.tamu.edu/
indexbyname.html

University of California IPM Online: www.ipm.ucdavis.edu/
PMG/menu.homegarden.html

IPM Resources

The following companies are sources for IPM products such
as pest monitoring traps and natural enemies:

Green Methods—greenmethods.com/site/

Arbico Organics—wwwaarbico-organics.com

Koppert Biological Systems—www.koppert.com/products/

_ARIZONA COOPERATIVE

EENSION

THE UNIVERSITY OF ARIZONA + COLLEGE OF AGRICULTURE AND LIFE SCIENCES

THe UNiverRsITY oF ARIZONA
CoLLeGE oF AGRICULTURE AND LIFE SCIENCES
Tucson, ARIZONA 85721

Stacey BEALMEAR
Assistant Urban Horticulture Agent

Contact:

Stacey BEALMEAR
staceyb@cals.arizona.edu

This information has been reviewed by University faculty.
cals.arizona.edu/pubs/insects/az1521.pdf

Other titles from Arizona Cooperative Extension can be found at:
cals.arizona.edu/pubs

Any products, services or organizations that are mentioned, shown or indirectly implied in this publication
do not imply endorsement by The University of Arizona.

Issued in furtherance of Cooperative Extension work, acts of May 8 and June 30, 1914, in cooperation with the U.S. Department of Agriculture,
James A. Christenson, Director, Cooperative Extension, College of Agriculture & Life Sciences, The University of Arizona.

The University of Arizona is an equal opportunity, affirmative action institution. The University does not discriminate on the basis of race, color,
religion, sex, national origin, age, disability, veteran status, or sexual orientation in its programs and activities.

The University of Arizona Cooperative Extension 3