# Document 114922

THE UNIVERSITY
. OF ARIZONA.

College of Agriculture
and Life Sciences

College of Agriculture and Life Sciences

AZ1411

Revised 10/11

SALINITY MANAGEMENT AND SOIL AMENDMENTS FOR
SOUTHWESTERN PECAN ORCHARDS

J.L. Walworth

Introduction

Managing salts in Southwestern pecan orchards can be a major
challenge for growers, due to limited soil permeability and /or
low-quality irrigation water. However, effective, long-term salt
management is essential for maintaining productivity of pecan
orchards. The challenge is to effectively manage soil salinity
and sodium (Na) in a cost-effective manner, using appropriate
combinations of irrigation management, soil management, and
soil amendments.

Formation of Soil Salinity

Many arid region soils naturally contain high concentrations
of soluble salts, because soil weathering processes dependent
upon precipitation have not been sufficiently intense to leach
salts out of soils. Irrigation water and fertilizers contain salts
that may contribute further to the problem. Poor soil drainage
due to the presence of compacted layers (hardpans, plowpans,
caliche, and clay lenses), heavy clay texture, or sodium problems
may prevent downward movement of water and salts, making
implementation of soil salinity control measures difficult.
Adequate soil drainage, needed to allow leaching of water and
salts below the root zone of the trees, is absolutely essential for
effective management of soil salinity.

The risk of soil salinity formation is always greater in fine-
textured (heavy) soils than in coarse-textured soils. This is
because sandy soils naturally have larger pores that allow for
more rapid drainage. High clay content soil horizons anywhere
within the root zone may cause poor drainage and result in soil
salt accumulation.

Dangers of Soil Salinity

The most serious problem caused by soil salinity is the
decreased osmotic potential of soil water. This has the effect of
reducing plant-available water. Therefore, pecan trees grown
in salty soils will experience moisture deficits sooner than
those in non-salty soils, reflected by reduced growth rate, nut
size, and yield. A soil salinity level of 3.5 dS/m (measured in a
saturated paste; equivalent to 2200 ppm) can reduce growth by
approximately 25% (Figure 1). Branch die-back can occur at soil
salinity levels of 5 dS/m (3200 ppm), and trees may die when
soil salinity reaches or exceeds 6 dS/m (3800 ppm) (Miyamoto
et al., 1986).

1.0==

0.8;

0.6;

0.4;

0.2) RTD = - 0.095 x EC, - 1.09
| R=- 0.89"

0.0 ——— st ——
0 2 4 6 8

EC, (dS/m)

Figure 1. Reduction in pecan relative trunk diameter with increasing soil
salt concentrations. After Miyamoto, et al., Irrig. Sci. (1986) 7:83-95.

Additionally, salt-affected soils may contain concentrations of
certain ions, such as Na, lithium (Li), boron (B), and chloride (Cl),
that can be toxic to plants. Pecan trees are moderately sensitive
to Na and B toxicities, so high concentrations of these elements
may cause toxicity symptoms, including burning or necrosis
(death) of the leaf margins.

Salt-affected pecans typically have leaf burning or marginal
necrosis. These symptoms may appear on both older and
younger leaves, and are difficult to distinguish from Na or B
toxicity (Figure 2). A plant tissue test is the best way to distinguish
between these problems.

It is important to remember that while salts cause serious
problems for plants, they are actually not detrimental for
soils. In fact, high concentrations of soluble salts usually lead
to flocculation (aggregation) of soil clays, resulting in good
soil structure and permeability. On the other hand, high
concentrations of Na, relative to calcium (Ca) and magnesium

=== New Page ===

J. WALWORTH

Figure 2. Toxic levels of boron (shown here) or other salts cause
marginal necrosis on affected leaves.

(Mg), cause dispersion (the opposite of aggregation) which
results in soil permeability problems, including slow water
infiltration. Unfortunately, while high concentrations of soluble
salts may be beneficial for soil structure, salts are detrimental for
most plants.

Soil Salinity Control

Salinity is measured by determining the electrical conductivity
(EC) of irrigation water (EC_ ) or saturated paste extract of
soil (EC). The EC, directly related to salt content, is expressed
in units of dS/m. One dS/m is equivalent to 640 ppm of
dissolved salts. Electrical conductivity represents total salt
concentration; evaluating Na risk in irrigation water or soil
requires calculations involving separate measurements of Na,
Ca, and Mg concentrations.

The key to controlling soil salinity is adequate soil leaching
to move salts below the root zone. There are no amendments
that can directly control soil salinity. Some amendments can
improve soil drainage, and indirectly help control soil salinity
by improving conditions for leaching salts. Maintaining soil
drainage and providing adequate irrigation are factors the
grower can manage to control soil salinity.

The irrigation water salinity largely determines soil salinity
levels. As a rule of thumb, the EC of the soil (EC,) is at least 1.5
times higher than the EC of the irrigation water (EC,,), except
in very sandy soils. If drainage is poor, the EC, may be several

2 The University of Arizona Cooperative Extension

times higher than the EC... If the irrigation water quality is
very good (EC, <0.75 dS/m), then there is little need to worry
about salt buildup. However, if the water is even moderately
saline (EC, 1 to 1.5), attention should be paid to the danger
of salt buildup.

The most effective means of controlling soil salinity at
tolerable levels is to leach excess water and salts below the
root zone. The leaching requirement is the percent of water
applied to the crop (beyond the crop’s water requirement)
that must leach below the root zone to maintain soil salinity
at a desired level:

EC

Re 100
5(EC.)- EC, ~

where LR is leaching requirement, EC _ is salinity of the
irrigation water in dS/m, and EC, is the maximum soil
salinity which results in no growth or yield reduction. In
pecans, the maximum EC, causing no growth reduction is
approximately 2 dS/m (Figure 1). The greater the irrigation
water salinity, the greater the leaching requirement, thus it is
critical to know the salinity of orchard irrigation water. Figure
3 shows the leaching requirement for pecans, depending on
irrigation water salinity.

30
25
20
15

10

Leaching Requirement (%)

0 500 1000 1500 2000
Irrigation Water Salinity (ppm)

Figure 3. Leaching requirement for pecans.

Leaching can be accomplished by periodic applications of
excess water during the growing season, or by irrigation or
rainfall during the winter. A regular program of soil sampling
should be followed to ensure that salinity is being managed
properly and not accumulating in the rooting zone.

Tillage for Salinity Control

Unfortunately, low water permeability and poor soil
drainage can limit water infiltration and leaching of salts. If
low permeability is due to restrictive layers within the soil

=== New Page ===

profile, such as caliche or hardpans, then tillage may be an
effective means of increasing soil permeability. Amendments
alone may not correct such problems. Potential tillage
methods include ripping, trenching, and slip-plowing. These
methods are most effective if there are sandy layers within the
plowing depth. The sandy material can be mixed with the finer
soil as the restrictive layer is broken up, thereby increasing
soil permeability. Incorporation of animal manures or other
organic soil amendments may also help increase permeability
and water infiltration.

Formation of Soil Sodicity

High levels of Na, frequently found in arid region soils and
groundwater, can cause a special set of problems in beyond
hose discussed for other salts. In fact, many problems of
ow soil permeability can be traced to the effects of Na on the
behavior of soil clay particles. Sodium can cause problems
when it replaces Ca and Mg on clay cation exchangeable sites,
particularly in fine-textured soils. While Ca and Mg cause
soil clays to flocculate and encourage good soil aggregation,
Na causes clays to disperse, breaking down aggregates, and
leading to surface sealing and slow water infiltration. A soil
with an exchangeable Na percentage (ESP) greater than 10%
10% of the cation exchange capacity filled with Na) may
have permeability problems. Sodium status of soil can also be
assessed by determining the sodium adsorption ratio (SAR),
a measure of the Na to Ca+Mg ratio in soil or water which is
roughly equivalent to ESP.

The Na hazard of irrigation water is evaluated by
determining the SAR of the water. SAR values of 6 or greater
may indicate a potential Na problem, depending on the
texture of the soil the water is used to irrigate. The SAR of
irrigation water is a critical management parameter because
irrigation water is a primary source of soil Na, and soil Na
problems can usually be traced back to irrigation water
quality.

Controlling and Correcting Sodium
Problems

Restrictive soil layers such as caliche, hardpans, or clay
lenses can only be corrected by tillage. Sodium problems,
on the other hand, may be managed by proper use of soil or
irrigation water amendments. Preventing Na accumulation
with proper management is often more effective and almost
always easier than correcting an existing Na problem, so
development of a sound management program is key.
Unfortunately, leaching alone may not be sufficient to prevent
or correct Na problems.

To prevent Na buildup, high SAR irrigation water can be
treated with amendments to lower the SAR, or amendments
can be added directly to the soil. Amendments may either
contain Ca (such as gypsum), or release Ca from carbonates
in calcareous (lime-containing) soils (calcareous soils can be
identified by applying a drop of acid, which causes bubbling
or effervescence in the presence of calcareous minerals). In
general amendments will be applied to and incorporated into
the soil at higher rates than are used in irrigation water.

AMENDMENTS FOR SODIUM CONTROL

The most common Ca-containing amendment is gypsum
(CaSO,.2H,O). It is inexpensive, abundant, and non-toxic,
and can be added to either irrigation water or soil. Gypsum
application rates are commonly 1 to 10 tons /acre, depending
on soil and irrigation water properties. Gypsum is a neutral
amendment, so it has no direct effect on soil pH, but it can
slightly lower pH when added to soils with serious Na
problems.

Acids or acid-based amendments can be used to prevent
or correct Na problems in calcareous soils. Before using
these amendments, it is important that soil CaCO, content
be determined as noted above. Sulfuric acid is the most-
commonly used acid amendment. Sulfuric acid and other
acid-based amendments dissolve soil carbonates and yield

gypsum:

CaCO,+H,SO, > Ca*+S0,2+H,0+C0,

Sulfuric acid can be soil-applied or water-run. Application
rates are usually 1-3 tons/acre; gypsum equivalency rates
are shown in Table 1. Sulfuric acid added to irrigation water
also neutralizes carbonates and bicarbonates, which can
negatively affect water infiltration into soil. Note, however,
that if irrigation water pH is reduced below 5.5, corrosion of
concrete-lined ditches may occur. Elemental sulfur (S) is an
acid-based material that is transformed into sulfuric acid by
soil microorganisms; this in turn reacts with soil carbonates
as shown in the reaction above. A potential disadvantage of
using S is its slow reaction time. In warm, moist soils, four to
six weeks may be required for the complete transformation
of S to sulfuric acid; in cold or dry soils this conversion will
take longer.

Acid and acid-forming amendments have the potential to
lower soil pH, however it is usually not economical to change
the pH of calcareous soils. The main effect of acid application
is to dissolve calcium carbonate, and not to change soil pH.

Several other acid-based amendments are available to
growers. Many of these contain nitrogen (N), so they can
be used as fertilizers as well. Nitro-sul® is an ammonium
polysulfide material, which contains 20% NH aN and 40-
45% sulfur (20 - 0 - 0 - 40S). It causes release of acidity after
microbial oxidation. In some, but not all, cases applications
can increase the rate of water infiltration. Thio-sul® is an
ammonium thiosulfate material containing 12% NH,-N and
26% S (12- 0-0 - 26S). It also releases small amounts of: acidity,
but is used mostly as a fertilizer. N-Phuric® is a combination
of urea and sulfuric acid that contains 10-28% N and 9-18% S.
This amendment releases acidity, is a safer way to use sulfuric
acid, and can be safely used in drip or microsprinkler systems
as an N fertilizer and to prevent clogging of irrigation lines.
In most cases, the prices of these acid-based amendments
are higher than those of gypsum or sulfuric acid. Also, the
rates of these amendments used to supply N may not be

The University of Arizona Cooperative Extension 3

=== New Page ===

Table 1. ¢ Value represents S content only; nitro-sul also contains N.

Material Amount (Ibs) equivalent to 1 ton of gypsum
Gypsum 2000
Sulfuric acid 950
Sulfur 380
Nitro-sul 950 t

Table 2. Typical infiltration rates for soils of varying textures.

Soil Texture

Sand
Loam
Clay loam
Silty clay loam

effective for correcting sodium problems. It is recommended
that you consult with Cooperative Extension county agents or
other qualified persons to determine appropriate rates of these
amendments.

GUIDELINES FOR AMENDMENT USE

1. Determine if water infiltration into soil is abnormally slow.
Table 2 shows typical infiltration rates for soils of various
textures.

2. If infiltration is abnormally slow, determine the cause
using soil testing and evaluation. If restrictive layers exist,
tillage may be needed. If a Na problem exists, gypsum,
sulfuric acid, or acid-forming amendments should be used.
Often, a combination of tillage and amendment application
will be most effective for eliminating infiltration problems.

3. Determine application method and rates. The appropriate
type and rate of amendment depends on soil and water
properties, and various management factors. Each situation
should be evaluated individually.

4. Practice prevention whenever possible. Manage salts
and sodium before they become problems.

Conclusions

Salt in soils comes from natural sources, and also from salts
added by fertilizers and irrigation water. Salt buildup is the result
of a lack of effective leaching of salts out of soils. This may be
caused by poor drainage due to restrictive layers, heavy soils,
or sodium, or by lack of a proper leaching requirement. Pecans

Infiltration rate (in/hr)

2
0.5
0.3
0.1

are sensitive to salts and Na toxicity, so proper salt control is
essential for pecan production. Leaching salts through the soil
is the only effective way to avoid salt accumulation. Restrictive
layers such as caliche, hardpans, or clay lenses can only be
corrected by tillage. Sodium occurs naturally in soils and may be
presentin high concentrations in irrigation water. Sodium causes
dispersion of soil clays, crusting, and slow water infiltration
and drainage. Sodium problems can be prevented or corrected
by the appropriate use of amendments, including gypsum,
sulfuric acid, and various acid-forming amendments. Sulfuric
acid or acid-forming amendments are effective for correcting Na
problems only in soils containing calcium carbonate.

ARIZONA COOPERATIVE

ENSION

THE UNIVERSITY OF ARIZONA + COLLEGE OF AGRICULTURE AND LIFE SCIENCES

THe UNiversity oF ARIZONA
CoLLEGE oF AGRICULTURE AND LIFE SCIENCES
Tucson, Arizona 85721

James L. WaLworTH
State Soil Specialist

Contact:
James L. WatwortH
walworth@cals.arizona.edu

This information has been reviewed by University faculty.
cals.arizona.edu/pubs/diseases/az1411.pdf

Originally published: 2006

Other titles from Arizona Cooperative Extension can be found at:
cals.arizona.edu/pubs

Any products, services or organizations that are mentioned, shown or indirectly implied in this publication
do not imply endorsement by The University of Arizona.

Issued in furtherance of Cooperative Extension work, acts of May 8 and June 30, 1914, in cooperation with the U.S. Department of Agriculture, Kirk
A. Astroth, Interim Director, Cooperative Extension, College of Agriculture and Life Sciences, The University of Arizona.

The University of Arizona is an equal opportunity, affirmative action institution. The University does not discriminate on the basis of race, color,
religion, sex, national origin, age, disability, veteran status, or sexual orientation in its programs and activities.

4 The University of Arizona Cooperative Extension