# Document 115285

COLLEGE OF AGRICULTURE & LIFE SCIENCES
Cooperative
*| Extension

IX

EEE

<

azi200

Reviewed 06/15

NITROGEN MANAGEMENT FOR COTTON
J. C. Silvertooth

Fertilizer nitrogen (N) represents a crop production input that
should be used carefully in an effort to manage for optimum
efficiency, high yields, and earliness. The most efficient use of
fertilizer N (a high proportion of fertilizer N actually taken up
and utilized by the crop) is achieved by providing the N at a
time that the plant can use it. The N requirements of a cotton
crop basically follow the same pattern as flowering or fruiting
on the crop. Accordingly, N demand is very low early in the
season, picks up through early fruiting, reaches a peak demand
at peak bloom, and gradually declines as the crop approaches
and proceeds through cut-out. A recommended window for
applying split applications of fertilizer N to cotton is shown in
Figure 1, beginning at first pinhead square formation and ending
just prior to peak bloom.

Total N requirements will vary among fields and are related
to realistic, projected yield goals, which can be estimated by
using a N factor of 60 Ibs. N /bale of cotton. Residual NO,-N
in the soil and any NO,-N added to the crop through the
irrigation water can be subtracted from the total estimated crop
needs to determine the amount of fertilizer N needed. The total
fertilizer N can then be applied by the use of split applications.
By following crop development through the fruiting cycle, one
can also anticipate periods of high N demand. The stage of crop
development can be determined by counting nodes above the
top white flower (NAWF) shown in Table 1, and/or by referring
to heat units accumulated since planting (HUAP). Crop N
demand is closely related to the fruit load on the plant. Basically,
heavier boll loads demand more N. Therefore, an assessment

Split N Applications

Blooms/Area

Tire ——» (HUAP)

Figure 1. Recommended window for nitrogen applications.

TAble 1. Relationship between growth stage and Nodes Above top White
Bloom (NAWB)

Growth Stage (HUAP) NAWB
Early Bloom (1200) 9-11
Peak Bloom (2200) 7-8

Cut-out (2800) <5

of the crop fruit load can have a strong bearing on estimating
N needs. Crop fruit retention (FR) patterns can be compared to
established baselines for Arizona cotton (Figure 2). Since the FR
level is directly related to crop N requirements, some assessment
of crop vigor can provide an indication of this important aspect
of the crop. A reliable measure of crop vigor can be obtained
from a plant height (inches) to node ratio (HNR), which is
taken from a simple measure of plant height from the cotyledon
nodes, or base of the plant, to the terminal and counting the
number of mainstem nodes. The resulting HNR can then be

120

100

% Fruit Retention
8

a
500 7000 41500

Heat Units Accumulated After Planting

2000 2500 3000 3500

Figure 2. Fruit retention baseline with upper and lower thresholds.

=== New Page ===

25

20

15

1.0

Height (in}/Node Ratio

os

0.0
600 1000 1600 2000 2500 3000 3500

Heat Units Accumu ated After Planting

Figure 2. Fruit retention baseline with upper and lower thresholds.

compared to the established baselines shown in Figure 3. The
crop’s actual N fertility status can be assessed by measuring the
NO,-N (nitrate -N) concentration in the petioles and referring to
established and recently revised guidelines for both Upland and
Pima cotton (Figure 4). One should make note of the differences
between Upland and Pima cotton petiole guidelines, with Pima
commonly running about 40% lower than Upland in NO,-N
concentrations. Using these tools or measurements, a grower can
follow crop and fruit load development along with the actual
N fertility status to make decisions about when and how much
fertilizer N should be applied.

In the case of a crop in early bloom witha strong fruit load (FR
and HNRs near the middle baselines shown in Figures 2 and 3)
and an acceptable but declining level of NO,-N in the petioles;
an application of fertilizer N may very well be in order. On the
other hand, if the crop was recognized to be losing fruit for
some reason (drop in FR and HNRs trending toward or above
the upper thresholds), N applications may need to be withheld
or reduced. Additional N applied to a crop with a poor fruit
load can easily serve to enhance vegetative growth tendencies.

Fertilizer N can be managed with some flexibility in response
to actual crop condition. The split applications should be made
inapproximately 50 Ib. N/acre increments toward meeting total
needs based on a yield goal approach (ie. 3 bale/acre projected
yield X 60 Ibs. N/bale = 180 Ibs. N/acre total). Adjustments
can be made depending on levels of preseason residual soil N,
fertilizer N efficiencies, and crop condition.

2000

25000

20000

Adequate (Upland)

16000

dequate (Pima)
10000

6000

Petiole NO3-N Concentration (ppm)

ao 1000 1500 200 2500 0D 863500
Heat Units Accumulated After Planting

Figure 4. Petiole NO,-N guidelines for Upland and Pima Cotton.

COLLEGE OF AGRICULTURE & LIFE SCIENCES.
Cooperative
Extension

THe UNiversity oF ARIZONA

CoLLeGE OF AGRICULTURE AND LIFE SCIENCES
Tucson, Arizona 85721

J.C. SILVERTOOTH

Extension Agronomist - Cotton

Associate Dean and Director, Extension & Economic Development
Associate Director, Arizona Experiment Station (Maricopa, Yuma &
Safford Agricultural Centers)

Contact:
J.C. SILvERTOOTH
silver@cals.arizona.edu

This information has been reviewed by University faculty.
extension.arizona.edu/pubs/az1200-2015.pdf

Originally published: 2001

Other titles from Arizona Cooperative Extension can be found at:
extension.arizona.edu/pubs

Any products, services or organizations that are mentioned, shown or indirectly implied in this publication
do not imply endorsement by The University of Arizona.

Issued in furtherance of Cooperative Extension work, acts of May 8 and June 30, 1914, in cooperation with the U.S. Department of Agriculture, Jeffrey
C. Silvertooth, Associate Dean & Director, Extension & Economic Development, College of Agriculture Life Sciences, The University of Arizona.

The University of Arizona is an equal opportunity, affirmative action institution. The University does not discriminate on the basis of race, color, religion,
sex, national origin, age, disability, veteran status, or sexual orientation in its programs and activities.

2 The University of Arizona Cooperative Extension