# Document 115838

‘THE UNIVERSITY OF ARIZONA

Cooperative Extension

JA,

Maricopa Cotton Development Advisory

Aug 29, 2021
Pinhead 1st 1" Peak
Square Flwr Boll Bloom Cutout Terminate
I | | | I |
EE ee ss a
15-Mar
ua |
Ape
z 15-A\
Ape
r= pe mE:
civyy i .©6—lclkairr....LlLULUrUm
= om po
May [Oe
7 a
-Jun
0 400 800 1200 1600 2000 2400 2800 3200 3600
Heat Units After Planting
Heat Units After Planting
Planted: 1-Apr 15-Apr 1-May 15-May
2021: 3669 3410 3156 2853
Normal: 3436 3268 3028 2765
+/-Norm: 9 5 5 3
2020: 3678 3519 3231 2911
Water Use: : 1.26 1.60 1.94 2.03
Temperature & Heat Units
Last Week This Week
Max Min HUs_~ Rain Max Min HUs
Actual 107 74 194 0.00 2020 104 77 199
Normal: 102 73 190 Normal 101 72 188

Cotton Heat Stress
Date
8/24 8/25 8/26 8/27 8/28 8/29
NS L1 L1 L1 L1 L1

NS: No Stress; L1: Level 1; L2: Level 2

Weather Forecast

An approaching trough of low pressure will combine with moisture from former tropical storm Nora
to produce wet conditions Tuesday through Thursday. This system has the potential to produce
very heavy rains, beginning Tuesday in western AZ with the rains progressing into central &
eastern Arizona Wednesday & Thursday. Below normal temperatures are expected beginning
Tuesday & continuing for the rest of the week. Drier conditions with warmer temperatures are
forecast for the weekend. Longer term, forecasts suggest monsoon activity will return next week.

=== New Page ===

Agronomy Update

The last steps in the production of an Arizona cotton crop involves the making the last, or terminal, irrigation
of the season & then making the application of defoliants to prep the crop for harvest. Identifying the last set
of blooms & bolls to mature for harvest is the critical part of that process. Development from flower to a full-
sized mature green boll requires 600 HUs & an additional 400 HUs are then required for a full-sized green boll
to fully open (1,000 HUs total; see table below). Irrigations are needed to maintain good soil moisture from a
bloom to full-sized green boll stage for full fiber development. The presence of a tan seedcoat is a good indica-
tion of sufficient boll maturity. Defoliation is the next & final step of the crop season in preparation of the crop
for harvest. A general rule of thumb is to evaluate a field for defoliant application at ~ 2X the normal in-season
irrigation interval. The plants need to be stressed & senescing but still alive and physiologically active.

Boll Maturity Projections for Selected Late Season Flower Dates

Flower Date

Location

NA: Projected Boll Opening Date is After December 31.

Final Advisory Notice
This will be the final Cotton Development Advisory for the 2021 growing season & represents the end of my

involvement with the program. I have enjoyed putting these advisories together during the two growing
seasons since my retirement but feel it is time for the grower community and our current Extension profes-
sionals to evaluate this program and, if warranted, develop a new and improved product.

This program was initiated in 1991 following the difficult 1990 growing season that included a severe out-
break of pink bollworm & wet weather that resulted in flooding in central Arizona. Credit for the develop-
ment of this program goes to Sam Stedman, the former Agricultural Agent & County Director in Pinal County,
who pushed his Extension colleagues to develop a more effective & timely means of disseminating inform-
ation on cotton production. Since that time the advisories have been developed by the Arizona Meteorolog-
ical Network (AZMET) using local weather data collected by AZMET stations & input from Drs. Jeff Silvertooth
& Peter Ellsworth. A special word of thanks goes to Bruce Russell, the long-time AZMET Program Coordinator,
who assembled & disseminated the advisories each week.

Paul Brown

=== New Page ===

Precipitation & Water Supply Update

Precipitation was generally light across the entire Colorado Basin last week (left). Exceptions to this trend
were found in the higher elevations of Arizona and New Mexico. Precipitation since the beginning of the
monsoon (right; presented as % of normal) is running well above normal in much of the Basin. However, the
important source regions for spring runoff along the Continental Divide are generally running below normal.
Source: National Weather Service Advance Hydrological Prediction Service.

Last 45 Days Last 45 Days
Upper Colorado {107 sites) Lower Colorado (96 sites)
2 at WET PATTI TTT ET

JORMAL

Average streamflow index
Average streamflow index
ES

porttinistereritisietirpitareitipsitisietis RY gy Userrtisietesere teeta tetra tersitirertivistis RY

1
15 20 2 30 5 10, 15 20 25 15 20 2 30 5 10 #15 20 2
July August July August

Streamflow continues to run below normal in the Upper Basin (left). Flow in the Lower Basin has declined in
recent days but remains near long-term normals (right). Source: USGS WaterWatch.

=== New Page ===

Fall & Winter Forecast

NOAA Coral Reef Watch Daily 5km SST Anomalies (v3.1) 28 Aug 2021

30°E 60°E 90°E 120°E 150°E 180° 150°W 120°W s0°w 6o°w 30"w o

re |e
[ice

Forecasters believe La Nina conditions will develop this winter in the tropical Pacific. An area of below nor-
mal sea surface temperatures is already evident along the equator west of South American (above). La Nina
conditions are associated with below normal winter precipitation in the Southwestern U.S. The impact of
La Nina on winter precipitation is less certain in the Upper Basin, providing some hope for a more normal
snow pack in the important source region for the Colorado River. Source: NOAA OSPO

September through November Outlook

means FouaL i
ES RRS w.

FS. EG MEANS FouaL i
EGane PSS; Bava ERRREPESTERYRS ne
nS NORMAL

N nEAI
cheat Beta

The current 90-day outlook exhibits a strong bias for above normal temperatures (left) & a moderate bias
for below normal precipitation (right). Note that the below normal precipitation bias extends across the
entire Colorado Basin. Source: NOAA/NWS Climate Prediction Center

=== New Page ===

December through February Outlook

RT
RNG,
3
3 FQUAL i
KBR ALN. &
faove «
AL
‘an

ES MEANS Fouat ,
WEEE CBEUEY wm”

The outlook for December through February exhibits a moderate bias for above normal temperatures (left)
& a moderate bias for below normal precipitation (right). Much of the Upper Basin remains in the Equal
Chances (EC) designation suggesting precipitation could approach normal. Source: NOAA/NWS Climate

Prediction Center