# Document 115870

THE UNIVERSITY OF ARIZONA

IN Cooperative Extension

® | Field Crops

AGENDA

Virtual “Tent Talks”
Wednesday, August 19™, 2020 - 9:00 AM — 11:30 PM
Via ZOOM
CLICK HERE to Register

9:00 Dr. Ayman Mostafa Introduction to Zoom
9:10 Dr. Pedro Andrade-Sanchez Precision Planting Experiment on Cotton
9:30 Dr. Mike Ottman Planting a New Alfalfa Crop

Plant Growth and Development Information in Cotton
9:50 Dr. Randy Norton a a
Management Decisions

10:10 Dr. Alex Hu Industrial Hemp Diseases

Predator Thresholds in Cotton Insect Management

10:30 Dr. Peter Ellsworth soe
Decisions

Management of Sugarcane Aphid in Arizona Forage

Sorghum
a

11:00 Dr. Ayman Mostafa

Questions? Please contact
Ayman Mostafa
Area Agent & Regional Specialist, Field Crops IPM

University of Arizona

Cooperative Extension

4341 E. Broadway Road

Phoenix AZ 85040-8807

Phone: 602-827-8213

E-mail: ayman@arizona.edu

Issued in furtherance of Cooperative Extension work, acts of May 8 and June 30, 1914, in cooperation with the U.S. Department of Agriculture, Jeffrey C.
Silvertooth, Associate Dean & Director, College of Agriculture and Life Sciences, The University of Arizona. The University of Arizona is an equal
opportunity, affirmative action institution. The University does not discriminate on the basis of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, age, disability,
veteran status, or sexual orientation in its programs and activities. Persons with a disability may request a reasonable accommodation, such as a sign
language interpreter. Request should be made as early as possible to allow time to arrange the accommodation. Contact Ayman Mostafa at

ayman @cals.arizona.edu or 602-827-8213.