# Document 115907

Stink Bugs in AZ Cotton 17-18 October 2013

Before I begin my presentation, I wish to thank the
staff of the Maricopa Agricultural Center for helping
us build this field plot tour trailer along with the
recently added shade structure. This has been an
excellent means to showcasing what we are doing
in our field research program, including today’s
review of our small plot insect management trials.

I also need to thank the Arizona Cotton Growers
Association and Cotton Incorporated for their
grants in support of IPM programs as well as the
support of the agrochemical industry.

Ellsworth & L. Brown

Stink Bugs in AZ Cotton 17-18 October 2013

Deployment of Selective
Technologies
O whitefly [jj Pink botlworm [fj Lygus bugs []] other

12

=

No. of Sprays
onaaad

Before we launch into the data from this trial, it is
important to review our history of pest management
especially as it relates to the deployment of selective
technologies. Together with industry, we helped
growers to properly make use of the selective IGRs &
Bt cotton as part of a complete IPM plan with a
comprehensive outreach campaign that consisted of
extensive grower and pest manager education in
1996. The results were striking. Insecticide use was
cut at least by 50% over this period.

Ellsworth & L. Brown

Stink Bugs in AZ Cotton 17-18 October 2013

Coton Woking & Fed Tow, 18 Onur
Biker 4a Marca, =
~

Commercial-scale Brown
Stink Bug Management Trials
in Arizona

Peter C, Ellsworth & Lydia
Brown

Arizona Pest Management Center

University of Arizona __ ifr.
JR, CALS eae
Se

Our morning field tour focused on small plot research,
which is tremendously valuable in our development of
insect management tactics and strategies. We had the
opportunity to see from above the impacts of Lygus
bug, stink bugs, and whiteflies on one trial, and the
innovative incorporation of natural enemy information
in whitefly control decisions in another trial.

However, many times we can benefit from grower-
cooperator trials. These can be done simply by splitting
practices in a field or by conducting more elaborate,
replicated, large-scale research. This presentation will
detail the results of a 2013 trial where the grower and
PCA generously agreed to set-up and follow through on
a large, replicated field trial. Lydia Brown conducted all
the field sampling.

Ellsworth & L. Brown 2

Stink Bugs in AZ Cotton 17-18 October 2013

Selective Options for Lygus

O whitefly [jj Pink botlworm [fj Lygus bugs []] other

No. of Sprays

Then, we helped growers deploy a selective Lygus (a
mirid pest) feeding inhibitor [flonicamid (Carbine)] in
2006, and the cotton industry banded together to
develop a major pink bollworm eradication campaign.
Under this new IPM plan, growers and pest managers
throughout the state saw a continued lowering in the
need for foliar insecticides, halving it once again
relative to the previous period.

Adapted from Naranjo & Ellsworth 2009, & Ellsworth, unpubl.

Ellsworth & L. Brown 4

=== New Page ===

Stink Bugs in AZ Cotton 17-18 October 2013

Disruptive Influence of
Stink Bugs

O] whitefly [jj Pink bottworm [fj Lygus bugs []] Other

IGRs, Bt cotton & AZ IPM plan

However, in 2012 we witnessed the widespread
presence and local outbreaks of the brown stink bug,
Euschistus servus. The disruptive influence of these
stink bugs on our overall insect management plan
was apparent. Broad-spectrum insecticides, not used
in over a decade, were deployed to control stink bugs,
and caused disruptions that led to more frequent and
costly investments in whitefly, Lygus, mite and other
insect controls. 2012 saw a doubling in the number of
sprays required statewide to control all insects and
mites. In fact, the blue section of the bar is for
“Other” insects. This is the highest level for this group
since 1993. Prior to 2012, records show that our last
outbreak of this particular species was 1963! So there
is virtually no prior local expertise on the topic of
brown stink bug management.

12

No. of Sprays
Ft
5

ONa aD

Ellsworth & L. Brown

Stink Bugs in AZ Cotton 17-18 October 2013

Technology Use Plan

However, stink bugs change the picture. If they
remain an economic threat to our production, we may
see mid- and late-season needs for broad-spectrum
chemistry once again. The use of these materials will
further destabilize the management system, reducing
our ability to hold the other key and secondary pests
in check.

2013 has turned out to be every bit as challenging, if
not more so, than 2012 with respect to brown stink
bug management and the consequences of its control
on whitefly, Lygus, and mite management.

We hope the future is not a repeat of 2012-2013.
However, we can all better learn together by
conducting large-scale trials on grower-cooperator
fields.

Let’s review one 2013 site.
Ellsworth & L. Brown

Ellsworth & L. Brown

Stink Bugs in AZ Cotton 17-18 October 2013

In the recent past, our system broke down to 3 key
pests and a large array of secondary pests that
never become significant, IF disruptions of natural
controls do not occur. For PBW, Bt cotton is the
ultimate biorational, and now with eradication,
broad spectrum insecticides for its control were
fading completely from our system. For whitefly, we
organized our insecticides into 3-stages based on
selectivity, deferring all broad-spectrum inputs until
the end of the season, if needed at all. For Lygus, we
had one selective insecticide, flonicamid. Cotton IPM
in AZ had become an exceptionally well-developed
and selective system where conservation biological
control was firmly established as a key element. We
also have decision-support information that guides
the deployment of these valuable, selective
technologies.

Ellsworth & L. Brown 6

Stink Bugs in AZ Cotton 17-18 October 2013

Paloma Site (80 A)

Orthenes7
1b

Bifenture

1* Spray by ground

Near Gila Bend, we conducted a trial with a grower
and PCA on an 80 A field. The production system
was a little unusual in that the grower produces
cotton on the flat and irrigates on borders from
gated ditches. This conveniently gave us strips
(borders) through the field, each about 5 A in size.
The grower also had his own spray equipment that
we used for the first spray. As with any grower trial,
we discussed options and decided to strip the field
(as shown in orange and blue) with two contrasted
insecticides for stink bug control, bifenthrin
(Bifenture) vs. acephate (Orthene97), each at their
label max. rates.

This sort of replication helps us eliminate bias
across a field due to various soil or other production
related characteristics.

=== New Page ===

Stink Bugs in AZ Cotton 17-18 October 2013 Stink Bugs in AZ Cotton 17-18 October 2013

Paloma Site (80 A)

Bidrin +

Bidrin
niarinifenture

24 Spray by ground

This shows the grower’s spray rig putting out the As stink bugs persisted, we discussed and decided

1st spray. There was nothing fancy or specialized on a 2" spray. This time Bidrin (at 8 0z/A) was

about it. Just a standard ground rig. used on both strips but one strip (blue) got the
addition of bifenthrin (Bifenture at the full rate, 6.4
oz).

We stayed on pattern, alternating 10 acre “plots”.

Ellsworth & L. Brown 10 Ellsworth & L. Brown 1

Stink Bugs in AZ Cotton 17-18 October 2013 Stink Bugs in AZ Cotton 17-18 October 2013

Paloma Site (80 A)

Intruder
3.202

3"! Spray by helicopters uude*

‘ringed field with Intruder + Mayhem owen

By late in the season, we were concerned about

growing whitefly populations. And, we wished to We are especially grateful to Tri-Rotor out of
preserve the integrity of the replicated experiment. Buckeye who worked directly with us to get the 3r¢
So we applied acetamiprid (Intruder) at Arizona spray out.

SLN permitted elevated rates (in this case at 3.2
oz / A). But we also added acephate (Orthene97 at
a full 1 Ib / A rate) to one set of plots.

This effectively created 4 different regimes. Plus,
we sprayed Intruder + Mayhem (novaluron) in a
ring around the field creating this mosaic pattern.

This is quite an intricate grower trial. We would not
normally expect this in every trial. We really
appreciate the cooperation of the grower and PCA
here.

By arranging sprays in this way, we get the
maximum amount of information from the test.

Ellsworth & L. Brown 12 Ellsworth & L. Brown 13

=== New Page ===

Stink Bugs in AZ Cotton

Stink Bugs in AZ Cotton

17-18 October 2013

We audited all sprays to make sure they were
mixed, loaded and applied properly to the
designated strips.

Ellsworth & L. Brown 14

17-18 October 2013

Bitenture fb Oethene97 fh

Injured Bolls (%)

10

rs

2Jul tu

Let’s examine the data. Rather than show you the
whole trial’s data all at once, I will step through
date by date so that you can see just what we were
seeing and measuring at the time (without the
benefit of 20:20 hindsight).

We started at low levels in our boll sample, then
climbed to over 30% & we were in peak fruiting. At
that time, we discussed with the PCA & grower
various options we could contrast — this is a
interactive process; we don’t simply dictate what
should be done. We're trying to learn something. So
we went with Bifenture vs. Orthene. We did get a
significant lowering with Bifenture. However, one
should not conclude that Orthene failed to do
anything, because there was no untreated area in
this trial to see where these injury lines would have
gone without any sprays.

Ellsworth & L. Brown 16

Stink Bugs in AZ Cotton

BSB Thresholds?

Before we look at the specific data that came from this trial,
Let’s examine BSB thresholds because this is a major
question when making decisions about intervening with
insecticides.

The primary fruiting cycle & top crop can be represented by
this two-humped curve representing flowers per unit area.
The dynamic threshold referred to by Dr. Phillip Roberts &
tested extensively in NC, SC & GA is shaped like an inverted
‘U’ overlaid on the primary fruiting cycle. This suggests that
boll injury percentages can be very high at the beginning &
end of the fruiting curve, likely as high as 50% without
sustaining economic loss. The real question is how low can

17-18 October 2013

we go? At peak fruiting, the most number of bolls susceptible
to stink bug feeding are present. This value varies by state &

region, but because our potential for losses to boll rot are
less than the humid SE, we offered a suggestion that 20%
might be as low as this should go. There is no specific AZ

data on this question yet.
Ellsworth & L. Brown

Stink Bugs in AZ Cotton

Bitenture fb Oethene97 fh

Injured Bolls (*%)

10

/Y

2Jul Gul 30

Two weeks later, injury levels increased to their
pre-spray levels for both regimes. We were still
fruiting well, though now on the downhill side of
the fruiting curve. Another set of discussions were
had and we decided to contrast two approaches
that both contained Bidrin at 8 oz per acre. [Note
this is the 1st use season for Bidrin in about 30
years in Arizona, but data from GA and elsewhere
suggests that this is among the best options for
Brown Stink Bugs.]

Ellsworth & L. Brown

15

17-18 October 2013

7

=== New Page ===

Stink Bugs in AZ Cotton 17-18 October 2013

Bitenture fb Oethene97 fh
— Bidrin —— Bidrin-Bitenrure

Injured Bolls (%)

°
2Jul—6vul Sul TS-Aug

So we applied Bidrin both with and without the
addition of Bifenture. Both regimes came down first
to about 16% and then even below 10% two
weeks later. We were very happy with this result,
though stink bugs were still evident in the field via
direct observation. By the 3 week post-spray,
fruiting was slowing down considerably but stink
bug injured bolls were on the rise again.

At just 20—24% boll injury at this stage of fruiting,
we were not overly concerned given the threshold
relationship mentioned earlier.

However, whiteflies were becoming more of an
issue and our sampling suggested a need to
intervene to control these now, rather than waiting,
because of the disruptions of natural enemies made
with these broad-spectrum stink bug sprays.

Ellsworth & L. Brown 18

Stink Bugs in AZ Cotton 17-18 October 2013

Bitentue fb Oethene97 fh
— Bidrin —— Bidrin-Bitenrure
Inirader Intruder

Bifenture th Orthene97 fh
=== Bidin == Bidein-Bitenture
Inrader+OrtheneO7 Inrader-Orthens97

Injured Bolls (’%)

3d

Bidrin
overspray

°
2Jul Gul Sul TSAug—27-AUg—0-Sep

Judge for yourself as to whether the Bidrin spray
was needed and/or effective. But since everything
was treated the same, the integrity of our 4 spray
regimes was still intact. It appears that where we
used Orthene previous to the Bidrin, we got
significant reductions in stink bug boll injury, albeit
still at high levels around 40%. Where we used just
Intruder, the effect was not as apparent.

40-60% of the bolls showing signs of injury by
stink bugs may seem like a very high level. But
recall the shape of our dynamic threshold, and
consider where we were in fruiting.

Ellsworth & L. Brown 20

Stink Bugs in AZ Cotton 17-18 October 2013

Bitentue fb Oethene97 fh
— Bidrin —— Bidrin-Bitenrure
Inirader Intruder

Bifenture th Orthene97 fh

== Bidin == Bidein-Bitenture
Inrader+OrtheneO7 Inrader-Orthens97

Injured Bolls (*%)

3d

Bidrin
overspray

°
2Jul Gul Sul TSAug—27-AUg

Whitefly adults in particular were a concern. So we did
not wish to use the IGRs, Knack or Courier, or the
other fully selective option, Oberon. Instead, we
elected a high rate of Intruder, newly established last
year under a 24c Special Local Needs label that
permits a 50% increase in the maximum use rate.

So we applied Intruder at 3.2 0z on everything and
added Orthene at 1 Ib / A on half the area, spawning
another set of regimes to evaluate.

We then hit that rainy period in late August shortly
after our spray.

Meanwhile, our stink bug injured boll counts
continued to rise & the grower/PCA decided that they
did not wish to risk any additional losses and
oversprayed the entire trial with Bidrin (8 0z) about
10 days later.

Ellsworth & L. Brown 19

Stink Bugs in AZ Cotton 17-18 October 2013

Plant Development
(NAWF)

Bidrin
oversprag
°

Zul 1 SOU ASA AT-AUg 1030p

As a PCA or grower, if you measure just one aspect of
plant development, this would be the one to measure
for insect management, Nodes Above White Flower.
NAWF is a reliable metric for tracking the fruiting curve.
With it, you can track where you are and when your
returns on plant protection inputs might cease to be
economical. For instance, our research suggests that
Lygus control beyond NAWF=4 is rarely justified
economically. And, in this case, we know that the ‘U’
shaped dynamic threshold suggests that high rates of
boll injury are tolerable very late in the fruiting curve.
At the time the Bidrin spray was made, NAWF = 0,
meaning the plant was completely cut-out and no
longer producing new blooms. It is true that there were
still some bolls susceptible to injury. But was there
enough economic return to justify this spray? We just
don’t know the answer to this question yet.

Ellsworth & L. Brown 21

=== New Page ===

Stink Bugs in AZ Cotton

17-18 October 2013

Bitentue fb

—— Bidrin

Bifenture th
Bidrin 1b
Inrader+OrtheneO7

Oethene97 fh
—— Bidrin-Bitenrure
Intruder

Orthene97 fh

== Bidein-Bitenture
Inrader-Orthens97

Stink Bugs in AZ Cotton

17-18 October 2013

Bitentue fb
—— Bidrin
Inirader

Bifenture th
== Bidin
Inrader+OrtheneO7

Oethene97 fh
—— Bidrin-Bitenrure
Intruder

Orthene97 fh

== Bidein-Bitenture
Inrader-Orthens97

’ ‘ +
3d | Bidrin
rain overspray

Whiteflies (Large ! disk)

°
2Jul Bul SOUL T3-Aug—Z-Aug —10-Sep

Obviously, the PCA and grower contend with more than
just stink bugs, and in fact we made one whitefly
targeted spray. So let’s look at the whitefly numbers.

Large nymphs per disk (3.88 sq. cm.) is the gold standard
for understanding the progress of any whitefly
population, I would say especially when following broad-
spectrum insecticide use that might suppress adults and
mask real problems underlying the dynamic.

In this case, whiteflies were very low to begin with and
only slowly increased until our 1%t two sprays were made.
This finally pushed populations above our threshold of 1
large nymph per disk. We sprayed with Intruder and all
levels declined significantly and quickly. In reality, most
of our whitefly pressure was on the edge of one side of
the field where they were elevated all season long. But
the Intruder spray worked very well.

Ellsworth & L. Brown 22

Stink Bugs in AZ Cotton 17-18 October 2013

Oario-tano
“AGRICULTURAL
lie RESEARCH CENTER

‘Arizona Department of Agriculture
USDA-ARS, NIFA=Extension IPM programs
Arizona Cotton Grower Assoc, Cotton Incorporated
Western IPM Center, Agroctiemical Industry

This was a quick look at an important and intricate
trial. I hope it inspires you to consider working with
us in the future so that we can gain ground on this
problem more quickly through joint, grower-
cooperator research. We would like to thank the
PCA and grower who collaborated on this project.
Their time and energy on this was above and
beyond what we normally expect. We also thank
the supporters of our IPM program.

The Arizona Pest Management Center (APMC) as part of
its function maintains a website, the Arizona Crop
Information Site (ACIS), which houses all crop production
and protection information for our low desert crops,
(http://cals.arizona.edu/crops), including a copy of this
presentation.

Photo credit: J. Silvertooth

Ellsworth & L. Brown 24

3d | Bidrin ®
Ab rain Foverspray

Lygus Nymphs per 100 sweeps

° :
aul Oyu 0ul TAG 2TAUg 0480p

Lygus are another key pest we must consider. Let’s
examine levels in this trial. Our threshold is 15 total
Lygus with at least 4 nymphs per 100 sweeps. We have
seen good results with this and even worked with levels
up to 8 nymphs per 100 sweeps successfully.

Here we see nymphs per 100 sweeps. We increased
over threshold around the beginning of August. But
since we were coming in with Bidrin, which has some
limited activity on Lygus, we simply continued to
monitor closely. By the 3 week of August, we hit a
spike in Lygus activity. However, we were already
below 4 NAWF, an area where returns on Lygus
controls are quite iffy. You can see, too, that whether
we used Orthene or not, Lygus levels declined as they
normally do in a field that is all cut-out. Lygus will
generally leave the field at this point.

Ellsworth & L. Brown 23