# Document 116644

THE UNIVERSITY OF ARIZONA

Cooperative Extension

JA,

az2061

August 2023

Growing Herbs In Tucson

Anne Lesenne

In Southern Arizona we are fortunate to be able to grow a
wide variety of herbs year-round. Unlike some parts of the
country where fall signals the end of the growing season,
here in the Sonoran Desert, we have two main growing
seasons, a cool-growing season that last from about October
through May and a warm-growing season that lasts from
May through mid-September. Different herbs thrive in each
season, and a few will, with a little help, happily grow all
year long.

At any time of year, you can step out your door and gather
herbs for cooking a healthy tasty meal, brewing a refreshing
tea, or making a fragrant potpourri. (Parlin, 2021). Some
herbs have the additional benefit of keeping pests away from
the other plants in your garden. With a little research and
preparation, it is possible to grow a variety of tasty aromatic
herbs. This article will help the desert gardener decide what
herbs to plant and when and how to plant them.

Basil leaves

Exposure

Light exposure is a big factor to consider when growing
herbs in a desert environment. Plant tags may say a plant
needs full sun, usually meaning 6-8 hours of full sunlight,
but keep in mind those recommendations are for where the
plant was grown. “Full sun” in the herb books and plant
tags, may translates to % sun —% shade or dappled sunshine
during the summer months in Tucson.

Some herbs, such as basil, and rosemary, are true sun
lovers, but during the summer in the southwest the sun
can be very intense, and temperatures can reach 105°. An
eastern exposure is considered ideal, giving sun in the
morning and shade in the afternoon. Other locations are
quite acceptable if measures are taken to limit summer sun
exposure by covering plants with 30-40% shade cloth or
moving them to shadier parts of the yard. Dry hot winds
can also be a problem. Taking advantage of a wall, fence,
deciduous trees, or hedge will allow you to put your plants
in the best location.

Winter sun and wind are not as harsh. Many herbs
enjoy full sun in the winter but will need to be protected
from the occasional frost. They can be covered if nighttime
temperatures drop below 32°. Cold weather hardiness of
herb plants and plants in general is dependent upon where
you live in Tucson. The only way to find out if a particular
plant will survive the winter is to try it. City location and
garden placement on your property will give you some
indication whether tender perennials will make it or not.
There are many herbs that will grow year-round in Tucson
regardless of your location.

If you grow herb plants in pots and other containers, you
can control their environment more closely. The pots can
be moved in and out of the sun, wind, and cold, onto the
patio or into the house temporarily to protect them from the
elements.

=== New Page ===

Dill in bloom

Soil

Important things to consider when growing herbs are
soil structure and most important drainage. Due to the heat
and lack of rainfall, desert soils tend to be sandy, rocky, and
lacking in organic material. Another common problem is
caliche, soil that is cemented together by calcium carbonate.
Caliche can impair water drainage, one of the most
important factors to consider when growing herbs.

There are things you can do to improve soil structure
and drainage in your garden. Dig beds at least a foot deep.
Adding 2-4 inches of compost into your garden bed will
improve the structure, increase water holding capacity,
add nutrients and increase the number of beneficial
microorganisms. Addition of sand will improve drainage in
clay soil. Caliche can in some cases be broken up. (For more
information about caliche see Walworth and Kelly, 2002).

Growing herbs in the ground can be hard work. Another
option is to grow herbs in pots or raised beds. Remember
that herbs like well-drained soil. Be sure to use a well-
draining potting soil. You can create your own mix. Here is
one suggestion:

1 part .. Coco coir — holds water
1 part .. Perlite — improves drainage, aerates soil

1 part .. Vermiculite
retention

- improves soil, moisture

2 The University of Arizona Cooperative Extension

Rosemary

1 part .. Coarse sand — improves drainage

1 part .. Compost — adds nutrients

This is referred to as a soilless medium or soilless mix. If
you purchase a commercially packaged mix you may have
to add additional sand or perlite to get proper drainage.
Dampen the mix and squeeze a handful, if it stays in a
clump when you open your hand it probably deeds more
sand or perlite. It should just fall apart. A proper mix when
watered heavily will be moist but will not stay soggy from
too much organic material. You may have to experiment to
get the right balance of ingredients. (Young, 2016).

Pots

Growing herbs in pots has several benefits. Pots are
perfect for small yards or patios. It doesn’t matter what
kind of soil is in the yard. Containers can be filled with a
rich free draining soil mix to fit the needs of each plant. In
the summer pots can be moved to shadier spots and frost
sensitive plants can be moved to a protected location in the
winter.

When selecting containers there are several factors to
consider. Some gardeners prefer plastic pots, others prefer
clay pots.

=== New Page ===

e Plastic pots — they are lighter and more affordable;
however, they can retain more water than clay pots
and absorb heat especially black plastic pots.

¢ Clay pots - they are porous letting water evaporate.
This helps keep plant roots cooler in the summer.
Plants in clay pots may require more water. Clay
pot soil mix should contain a little more coco coir to
help compensate.

¢ Wooden boxes and whiskey barrels also work very
well.

Whatever the container, it must have drainage holes in
the bottom. Raise pots up off the ground to allow water to
drain and allow air to circulate. Plants will not survive if the
soil does not drain well.

Pots should be at least 14 inches in diameter. Larger
pots give roots space to develop, protect the roots from
extreme temperatures, and require less frequent watering
than smaller pots. Containers in direct summer sun tend to
“cook” the roots and any pot under 14” in size will be very
difficult to keep moist. Large pots can be heavy and difficult
to move. Consider putting larger pots on wheels.

All containers must be thoroughly clean when planted
and should be soaked for a short time in a 10% bleach
solution to sterilize them and kill any harmful organisms if
they were used previously.

Water

Water plants often enough to keep them moist but not
soggy — proper soil drainage is the secret. In summer this
may mean watering pots twice a day. If plants need water
more than twice a day, then chances are the pot is getting too
much sun or the plant is pot bound. Container placement
will help to reduce the amount of water they need. If a
reference source says a plant should have direct sun this
may not be necessarily true for Tucson. The plant may grow
well in partial shade and its water requirements will be
much different.

For plants in the ground, it is better to water deeply and
less often. Daily, shallow irrigation can stunt and kill plants
in the ground. The garden can be watered manually by hose,
drip irrigation, or soaker hose making sure the water soaks
in at least 12 inches. As a rule, water should not be applied
to the foliage because it can cause sunburn and the minerals

in our water can cause leaf damage. If using drip irrigation,
make sure emitters are strategically placed especially for
herbs that increase by creeping along the soil surface such
as thyme, prostrate rosemary, and catnip.

yet Be 2
Mint should be grown in a pot with a saucer underneath so they don’t
spread.

The University of Arizona Cooperative Extension 3

=== New Page ===

- NS ND
\ SS.
Young lavender in pots is already blooming

Fertilizer

Garden soils for herbs can be prepared using the same
recommendations for fertilizer as are used in vegetable
planting. However, herbs do not need heavy or frequent
application of fertilizer. Perennial herbs will benefit from
the application of compost or organic amendments such as
fish emulsion, bone meal and blood meal in the spring.

If a soilless potting mix is used, then the fertilizer
requirements are different because this may be a sterile
medium which contains no nutrients (check the package).
Therefore, it will be necessary to fertilize your pots on a
regular schedule — usually once a week. Use a balanced
fertilizer that contain nitrogen, phosphorus, and potassium
(NPK). There are many water-soluble plant foods on the
market, and it is not critical which one is used but it must
include all elements. A more convenient way to feed pots
is to add a slow-release fertilizer to the soil mix that only
needs to be applied every three months. Always make sure
to follow package directions.

Pests

Insects, generally, do not bother herbs as often as they
do most other plants. It is best not to use systemic insect
controls on food plants. A few insects will not harm plants
and many insects are predators and should not be killed
under any circumstances. If there is a harmful infestation,
insecticidal soap usually works very well. Make sure
to follow the directions on the container. Leaf chewing
caterpillars can be picked off by hand or controlled with

4 The University of Arizona Cooperative Extension

a natural bacteria, Bacillus thuringiensis (Bt). It can be
purchased in garden supply stores and is safe for all living
things except caterpillars. (National Pesticide Information

Center).

Beneficial Insects

Herbs can benefit other garden plants by attracting
insects that feed on you garden pests. The green lacewing,
for example, feeds on aphids, thrips, and other annoying
soft-bodied insects. Flowers of dill, yarrow, and cilantro
attract the green lacewing, as well as hoverflies, lady bugs,
and parasitic wasps. When it flowers basil becomes a bee
heaven.

Growing From Seed

Most herbs can be easily grown from seed. There are
benefits of growing your own herb plants:

¢ Many seed companies sell a wide variety of
interesting herb seeds. You can explore a whole
range of herbs that you can’t get at the local
nurseries.

e Itis much more economical to grow plants from
seed or to make cuttings and divisions of plants
you already have. It can also be very rewarding to
share your baby plants with other herb gardeners.

¢ When you propagate and grow your own plants,
you have total control of the growing conditions.
You choose the soil and fertilizer.

*Fun Fact: You can use your Pima County Library card
to checkout plant seeds.

Oregano

=== New Page ===

Harvest

Herbs respond well to being pinched or trimmed
back. Pruning will encourage new and vigorous growth.
Trimmings of culinary plants can be used fresh in the
kitchen, frozen or dried for future use.

Harvesting can be done in all seasons, not just fall. Cut
the stems or leaves in the early morning or evening as there
are less oils present in the leaves during the heat of the day.

There are several ways to dry herbs:

¢ Dry in bunches upside down in a dark place (2
weeks) or on a screen covered with cheesecloth.

¢ Small bunches may be dried in a microwave oven.
Lay the cleaned leaves in a single layer between
two pieces of paper towel. Microwave them in
30-second sessions, turning the leaves over between
each session. Repeat until the leaves are completely
dry and brittle.

e Herbs can also be spread on a cookie sheet and
dried on the “warm” setting in the oven.

e Large leaved herbs such as sage or basil should be
stored whole and crumbled when used to retain
peak flavor. Keep leaves whole for tea.

To reduce herbs to powder, put in blender. Store jars,
plastic bags, or tins in a dark cupboard. Store up to a year
then replace. In cooking, use 1/3 to 1/2 more fresh herbs
than when using dry herbs. (Herman, 2021)

Fuzzy sage leaves

Seasonal Guide

In the desert southwest, herbs can be grouped into cool-
season annuals, warm-season annuals, and perennials.
Annuals live for one season and then die. Cool-season
annuals grow from October to May, and warm-season
annuals grow from April to November.

Perennial herbs live for several years, but some prefer
the heat of summer while others can’t survive our hot dry
summers.

Cool-season annual herb

Fall is the best time to plant cool-season annual herb. (see
planting calendar) They prefer to grow in the cool to mild days and
chilly to cold nights we have in Tucson during the cool season.
Planting herbs in the fall when temperatures are cooler relieves
them of heat stress and allows their roots to get well established.
Just remember, not all cool season herbs are cold hardy. They will
have to be protected if there is frost.

Cool-season annual herb transplants can also be put out in
spring, but spring gardens require extra attention because of
longer hotter days and strong drying winds. Your plants may dry out
rapidly and a temporary protective wind screen may be necessary
until the plants become established and mature. Plant the largest
transplants you can find. Any plants lost in the spring can be
replanted in the fall.

Warm-season annual herbs

Spring is a good time to plant warm season herbs such as basil
and summer savory. The temperatures are still cool enough to let
the plants get established before summer heat sets in.

Cool-season perennial herbs

Fall is a good time to start perennial herbs that prefer cooler
weather such as French tarragon, lemon balm, marjoram, mint,
oregano, and chamomile. Most perennial herbs can put up with
some cold weather.

Warm-season perennial herbs

Heat loving perennial herbs such as Mexican tarragon, lemon
verbena, lemon grass and society garlic prefer to be set out in the
spring. Planting in the spring gives herbs time to get established so
they will be in a much stronger position to deal with summer heat.
If you do any planting in the summer, watch your watering carefully.
Plants in pots may need to be watered twice a day and almost all
herbs prefer a little afternoon shade during the hottest part of the
summer.

The University of Arizona Cooperative Extension 5

=== New Page ===

Herb Planting Calendar for Tucson

Annual When to Plant Protect
Herb Perennial From
Biennial Oct - Nov Feb-Apr May- Jun Frost
Anise A e e
*Basil A e
Bay P e
Borage A e e
Catnip P e e
Chamomile A e e
Chervil A e
*Chives P e e
*Cilantro A e e e
*Dill A e e e
Epazote P e
*Fennel A e e e
French Tarragon P e
*Garlic (clove) A e
*Garlic Chives P e e
Hyssop P e
*Lavendar P e e e
Lemon Balm P e e
*Lemon Grass P e
Lemon Verbena P e
*Marjoram P e e
*Mint P e e
*Oregano P e e e
*Parsley A e e e
*Rosemary P e
*Sage P e e
Salad Burnet P e e
Savory (winter) P e e
Savory (summer) A e
Shiso A e e
Shungiku A e e
Sorrel A e e
*Thyme P e e
*Yarrow P e e

*herbs for the beginning gardener

6 The University of Arizona Cooperative Extension

=== New Page ===

References

Herman, Marilyn and Sussanne Dreiessen (2021). Preserving
Herbs by Freezing or Drying. University of Minnesota
Extension.

Parlin, Jennifer, Parker Filer, Daniel McDonald, Jacqui Stork,

and Jada Parker. (2021). Growing Herbs for the Health of
It! Arizona.edu/ pub /az1922-2021.pdf

National Pesticide Information Center, Oregon State
University. http: / /npic.orst.edu/factsheets/btgen.html

Walworth, J and Kelly, J (2002). Managing Caliche in the Home
Yard.arizona.edu/pub/az1281.pdf.

Young, K. (2016). Container gardening in the Southwest.
arizona.edu/ pubs /az1713-2016.pdf.

Additional Reading

Gilmer, Maureen (2015). Growing Vegetables in Drought,
Desert, & Dry Times. Sasquatch Books. Seattle, WA

Owens, Dave (2000). Extreme Gardening. Poco Verde
Landscaping. Tempe, AZ

Soule, Jacqueline (2022). Southwest Fruit and Vegetable
Gardening. Cool Springs Press. Beverly, MA

The Low Desert Herb Gardening Handbook. Available online
from the Arizona Herb Association

This article was originally prepared by Pima County
Master Gardeners Judy and Dick Faitsch.

It was updated in 2023 by Pima County Master Gardeners
Deborah Green and Glenda Bavier.

THE UNIVERSITY OF ARIZONA

Cooperative Extension

JA,

AUTHORS

ANNE LESENNE
Assistant Agent, Horticulture

CONTACT

ANNE LESENNE
annelesenne@email.arizona.edu

This information has been reviewed
by University faculty.
extension.arizona.edu/pubs/az2061 -2023.pdf

Other titles from Arizona Cooperative Extension
can be found at:
extension.arizona.edu/pubs

Issued in furtherance of Cooperative Extension work, acts of May 8 and June 30, 1914, in cooperation with the U.S. Department of Agriculture, Edward C. Martin, Associate Vice President and Director of
the Arizona Cooperative Extension System, Division of Agriculture, Life and Veterinary Sciences, and Cooperative Extension, The University of Arizona.
The University of Arizona is an equal opportunity, affirmative action institution. The University does not discriminate on the basis of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, age, disability, veteran status,

sexual orientation, gender identity, or genetic information in its programs and activities.

The University of Arizona Cooperative Extension

7