# Document 121938

Arkansas Fruits vec etahle
fd tUESE Galena

University of Arkansas System

DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE “7 ar
Of RESEARCH & EXTENSION .

VOLUME 1 © 2012) 4

/

y

iCS/#7

=== New Page ===

endless

The benefits of gardening are endless — it can helo you connect with nature, reduce stress and be
a rewarding form of physical activity. It can provide nutritious food, and for those on a limited in-
come help stretch those food dollars. Gardening gives a sense of purpose and rewards you with a

harvest of gorgeous flowers or fresh fruits and vegetables to enjoy and share with others.

And while a change in your physical abilities might make gardening a little more difficult, it doesn't

mean you have to give it up! Just a few modifications in gardening practices and tools will allow you
to enjoy your favorite hobby for years to come. Enaless Gardening is a great resource that will helo
return the joy of gardening to those with special needs. Inside youll find tips and techniques for creat-
ing or modifying easily accessible gardens, advice on selecting ergonomic tools and low-maintenance

plants, as well as directions for constructing raised bed planters.

Endless Gardening is a publication of the Arkansas AgrAbility program. Sponsored by the USDA,
Arkansas AgrAbility promotes productivity and independent living to agriculture workers and their
family members who are restricted by an injury, age or health condition. For more information on
AgrAbility, contact your local Cooperative Extension Office, visit us on the web at www.udexedu,

or follow us on Facebook.

Jessica Vincent has nearly 20 years’ experience in management, accounting, health, nutrition,
physical exercise, health education, program development and program implementation. Her
degrees include an M.Ed. in Education Technology from the University of Arkansas at Fayetteville,
aB.S. in Health Science from the University of Arkansas at Little Rock, and an A.A.S. in Business
from National Park Community College. She is also a Certified Fitness Trainer (CFT) through
International Sports Sciences Association and a Certified Health Education Specialist (CHES)
through the National Commission for Health Education Credentialing, Inc. Vincent has been
actively involved in the Arkansas AgrAbility project since 2010, serving as Project Coordinator.

Jessica Vincent Dr. Rosemary Rodibaugh Increasing Capabilities Access Network
Project Coordinator Professor of Nutrition www.ar-ican.org

Arkansas Agr Ability Arthritis Foundation Southeast Region, Inc.

wwwarthritisorg

Julie Thompson
Dr. LaVona Traywick Graphic Artist
Associate Professor Communications/ National AgrAbility Project
of Gerontology Marketing www.agrability.org

=== New Page ===

Gardening Without Pain ......
Don't Let the Dirt Hurt: Stretches for Gardening _
Raise It Up a Notch with Raised Beds wccsmsunununnnunnnnnnnunnnnnnn 1
Community Gardening cmcscnnninnnunne
Fruit & Vegetable Harvest Calendar

ENDLESS GARDENING 2

=== New Page ===

rc Oa

J t betause you emparierce pain ‘in the oorden: :

doesn't mean you have to give it up. Investing

in the appropriate tools and using the correct oe

a

Jr spat

" experienge — and minimize-the pain! —

=== New Page ===

Get a handle on your tools

There are many tools now available that can help to
reduce the pain associated with gardening. Choosing
the right tools can make a big difference in how much
you enjoy your gardening experience, and how many
aches and pains you experience afterwards.

Make sure your tools are the appropriate size.
Choose a hoe, cultivator and rake that you can
maneuver comfortably without bending. Tools with
telescoping handles that extend your reach can be less
tiring on your back and hands, while the forearm grip
can give you additional leverage when digging or
weeding. Watering wands are another useful tool to
reduce the stress associated with over-reaching.
Purchase lightweight and small-bladed tools to reduce
the amount of load and resistance

Tools with ergonomically designed handles
reduce the force and range of motion necessary to
perform certain tasks. Pistol grip tools, with an
L-bend in the handle and a forearm grip, allow you
to keep your wrist completely straight as you work.
By keeping the hand and wrist in a natural and
comfortable position, these specially designed
handles ease the stress placed on the joints.
To extend the life and effectiveness of your tools,
it’s important to keep them clean and in good condi-
tion. Purchase gloves that are fast drying and can be
hosed off when you are finished using them. Keep
your tools clean, sharp and well-oiled. This will help
avoid resistance when using them and cut down on
the manpower needed to execute certain tasks.

Cultivate comfort

Prevent sore knees and backs by using benches or
kneelers. Combination kneelers with handles allow you
to help lower and raise yourself using arm strength and
can be flipped over to use as a bench. Stools or benches
with locking wheels make moving from weed to weed
easier and reduce repeated standing and sitting.

Use a caddy or garden tool apron to keep your
tools within easy reach. Aprons specially designed to
be used with a wheelchair are available now. A large-
wheeled cart will help you move plants and mulch
around without having to carry them and is easier on
your back than a wheelbarrow.

Protect your hands from blisters, thorns and cuts
by investing in a good pair of gardening gloves. Cotton
and cotton-polyester gloves are great for light

Ergonomically-designed curved and pistol grip handles (top)
reduce the range of motion and force necessary to use

gardening tools and ease the s
kneelers with handles (bottom)
raise yourself using arm streng
knees and back, and can be f

Tess placed on joints. Garden
allow you to help lower and
th rather than straining your
ipped over to use as a bench.

gardening chores, while leather gloves are recom-
mended for pruning and bush removal. Look for qual-

ity leather with a cloth back

that will let the gloves

breathe and keep your hands cool and dry.
Chemical resistant gloves should be used when spray-
ing pesticides, herbicides, acids, oils or other chemicals.

Remember to get the gloves

that fit your hands — the

right size is important. You don’t want the gloves to be
too tight, constricting your movement. To determine

the best fit try the gloves on

both hands, make a fist and

imitate movements you make when gardening.

And don't forget to prot

ect yourself from the sun!

Wear wide brim hats, light-weight long sleeved shirts,
and sunscreen with an SPF of 15 or higher. Be sure to
drink plenty of decaffeinated fluids, avoid being out-

doors between 10 a.m. and
breaks in the shade.

2 p.m. and allow time for

Reduce the effort required to care for your garden by
using low-maintenance plants. Opt for perennials,
shrubs and trees instead of annuals which need to be

ENING 4

=== New Page ===

MASTER
GARDENERS:

JOIN
US &

Hr;

¢ Volunteerism
¢ Education
¢ Fellowship

TO FIND OUT MORE
CONTACT YOUR
LOCAL COUNTY

EXTENSION OFFICE.

UA

DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE
RESEARCH & EXTENSION MASTER

University of Arkansas System

5 ENDLESS GARDENNG

replanted every year, especially in hard-to-reach areas of the garden. Pull
weeds after irrigating or rain, as moist soil makes it easier to pull weeds
with less resistance. Use wood mulch to keep plants cool, to conserve water
and to help provide a barrier to weeds. A small layer of newspaper under
the mulch will also provide an organic, biodegradable landscaping fabric.

Save your back by placing containers where you want them before
you fill them. A layer of stones or broken pottery will improve drainage
and reduce the weight of the container if it does need to be moved. And
buy smaller bags of soil — they are much easier to handle.

Consider bringing your plants to you by raising your workspace from
ground level to waist-high with a raised garden bed. Not only can they
provide better drainage and expanded growing seasons, the also make
gardening more accessible by reducing the amount of bending required
to care for your plants. For a great how-to on raised planter beds, see the
article on page 7.

The right technique

Before you begin working in your garden, warm up your joints and
muscles with a brief walk and some stretching. Work during the
time of day that you feel best. For example, if you feel stiff in the
morning, then save gardening activities for the afternoon. Don’t
forget to stretch during and after gardening as well to help keep
muscles from becoming stiff. Review the exercises listed to the right
for some helpful stretching techniques.
Switch Tasks Often. Repetitive motions or staying in one position
too long can cause stiffness. Try to alternate bending or stooping jobs
with standing or reaching jobs, and take periodic breaks. Avoid
slouching over while you garden as poor posture can cause pain,
fatigue and even strains.
Use your largest and strongest joints when possible. For example,
when lifting use your legs instead of your back. When troweling, use
your forearm and elbow instead of your wrist and fingers. And use the
palms of your hands to push levers and tools instead of your fingers.
Most importantly, respect pain! If you feel discomfort, stop
working and rest. Consult your healthcare provider if the
pain continues. Despite your best efforts, some aches,
pain and stiffness can still result from a day spent in the
garden. If you experience soreness or pain, reduce the
amount of activity you do the next day. Try a warm
bath to help relax stiff or sore muscles after
gardening or heat and cold therapy to ease joint
pain. Check with your physician or visit
wwwarthritis.org for more information on
which therapy is best for your type of pain.

Most importantly, respect
pain! If you feel discomfort,
Stop working and rest.

=== New Page ===

Shoulder Shrugs
Raise shoulders
towards ears, hold
5 seconds. Relax
downward to a
normal position.

Neck Tilts

eep shoulders
relaxed and arms
anging loosely.

it head sideways,
old 5 seconds. Tilt
‘0 the other side,
old 5 seconds.

Neck Stretch
eep shoulders
relaxed down-

ward and arms
anging loosely.
Gently tilt head
orward. Hold

| 5 seconds

Wrist/

Forearm Stretch
Place hands palm
to palm. Rotate
around until they
face down, keep-
ing elbows even.

Hold 5 seconds.

Wrist/

Forearm Stretch
Place hands palm
to palm fingers
facing upward.
Keeping palms
together and

| elbows even.

Hold 5 seconds.

Back/Hip Stretch
Bend left leg over
right and look over
left shoulder. Place
right hand on left

al thigh and apply

slight joressure. Hold
5 seconds. Repeat
(on right side.

Back Stretch
Lean forward,
keeping head down
and neck relaxed.
Hold IO seconds.
Use hands to push
back up.

Hamstring
Stretch

Sitting, hold left leg
just above and
lbetindllinse Gently
pull bent knee
toward the chest.
Hold 5 seconds.
Repeat on right leg.

Dont Let the Dirt Hurt!

Stretch your way to a healthier you and a better garden in just 12 minutes!

Interlace fingers

behind head with

elbows out. Pull

shoulder blades
together. Hold
5 seconds.

Upner Body
Stretch

Interlace fingers
palms up, straighten
arms above head.
Elongate and
stretch up. Breathe
deeply and hold for
10 seconds.

Side Stretch

Hold left elbow
with right hand.
Gently pull elbow
behind head to
stretch shoulder or
back of upper arm.
Hold 10 seconds.
Repeat on right side.

Hand/Finger
Stretch

Separate and

4} straighten fingers.

Hold 10 seconds.
Bend fingers at

4 the knuckle.

Hold 10 seconds.

J Repeat.

Stretching 4 minutes before, during and after you garden can reduce
tightness, stiffness and increase productivity for any gardening activity.

=== New Page ===

BRING NATURE TO NEW HEIGHTS WITH RAISED BEDS

hether planting flowers, herbs or vegetables,
raised gardens can make gardening easier by
reducing the need to bend or stoop. Not only

do they make gardening more accessible, raised gardens can
provide better drainage, expanded growing seasons and ease of
maintenance. Raised gardening includes hanging baskets, large
pots and vertical gardens such as trellises and arbors, and of
course, raised beds.

If you decide to add a raised bed to your garden design, the

options are almost limitless. Pick a height that makes it easier for
you to garden and a shape that fits in with your landscape. The site

shou
from

build

d be flat and level, and there should be slight drainage away
the container.

For ease of use, a one-sided bed — such as those adjacent to a

ing — should be no wider than 2 feet. A two-sided bed should

be no wider than 4 feet. This makes it easier to reach from one side
or another without overexertion. Raised beds with wide borders
can offer a place to sit while working.

There are three basic types of raised beds: ground-level,

semi-ambulatory and wheelchair-accessible. Ground-level beds are

abou
beds

t six inches to a foot off the ground, while semi-ambulatory
are a bit higher up at about 2¥ to 3 feet off the ground.

Wheelchair-accessible beds are somewhere in-between, at about 2

to 24% feet off the ground or whatever height
will comfortably fit a wheelchair underneath.
Be sure to build the bed near a water

source to make watering easier. Use stones or
cement around the spigot to ensure that the
ground is not muddy, and make sure to have
an easy pathway to your raised bed, using
cement, concrete or bricks to make it more

Raised beds can be built high enough to stand at or
designed to slip your knees under while sitting

=== New Page ===

_ Raised Bed 72..-2

Prepare the site

¢ Depending on what you plan to grow, choose a site that
will get the appropriate amount of sunlight.

¢ Be sure you choose a flat, level location with good
drainage and easy access to water that allows enough
room for you to work.

© Clear the container area of sod and weeds.

Build the container

¢ Decide how large your container will be. Select a length
that best suit your needs; recommended width is no more
than 4 feet.

¢ Determine how many 2x4s you want to use on the sides
of your raised bed — this will determine your height. Cut a
4x4 into four posts equal to the desired height. Make sure
the sides will be flush with the top and bottom of the 4x4s.

¢ Determine how many 2x4s you need for each side of
the bed. Cut pieces to the length and width of bed.

Remember to measure twice, cut once!

¢ Attach the first side of 2x4s to two posts with galvanized
screws. Build the opposite side in the same way. Add the
remaining 2x4s to the ends of the sides to form a box

Use a level to make sure your frame is level in all directions
to prevent drainage issues. If part of your frame is high,
just remove soil beneath it until you have a level frame.

¢ Fill your bed with a good mixture of quality topsoil, com-
post and rotted manure. Once they're filled and raked
level, youre ready to plant or sow seeds!

accessible for rolling carts or wheelchairs. This will also keep _« Stone, brick and concrete can be very visually appealing and

the area from becoming muddy. offer a wide variety of options. However they can be expen-
The raised container described above is constructed sive and may require a contractor to construct the bed.

of lumber, but you can build your garden bed from

almost anything. Materials for building the bed usually + Salvage materials can be a cheap, even free alternative and

come down to what fits best: allow more creativity than
; ; . . ; other materials. Just beware
© Wood is easy to work with and inexpensive, but it can rot. J
of safety hazards.

Consider using cedar or a composite lumber.
Remember, the most
+ Cinderblocks, another inexpensive alternative, are easy to enjoyable type of garden is one
work with but are not as visually appealing. that lets you work pain-free.

€
i
Cal
el
is
foal

ENDLESS GARDENNG 8

=== New Page ===

“Take achion to uriprove Your lite

In Arlansas, 4-H tales the forra of community clube,
project groups, in-echool ancl afterschool programas.
The frees of 4-H lacle are as cliverse az the activities

in vhich they tale part. Some of the exciting pro-
grams merbers are experiencing fret hand elude:

Corturraudty eric:
Citizenslip of keackretip
Bohotice

Lircetock 6 poultry
Cearcksuing

Slooting eporte

Health, focel Gfrnitrition
Public spraldne,
Photogrep lor

Ancl 63 ranch rica

y;

Best of all, particyation
in aml its
programs are available in
each of ony 7S counties.

=== New Page ===

CROWN Cunmvales

+

ommunity gardens are a great way ot bringing people
together, but they have different meanings for different
people. Typically, they reflect the desires of those directly
involved in their management and upkeep as well as the

needs of the surrounding community. But whatever the reason,

community gardens can be both rewarding and challenging.

=== New Page ===

Community gardens can be a great resource to individuals, families
and communities alike. Benefits include food production, exercise,
improving the environment, teaching outdoor education and enabling
cultural opportunities. Community gardens exist in many forms:

+ Youth/School Gardens introduce children to food production, nutrition,
composting and ecological awareness. These are typically associated
with classroom lessons and hands-on gardening activities.

¢ Entrepreneurial/Job Training Market Gardens are used by non-profit
organizations and other agencies to employ youth and others while
teaching them practical skills for future employment. Typically, they
grow and sell the produce that they raise.

¢ Communal Gardens are organized and maintained by groups of people
who share both the work and the rewards. Produce is usually distrib-
uted among the group members or donated to local food pantries.

+ Food Pantry Gardens are maintained by volunteers and/or food pantry
clients and all of the food is donated to the food pantry.

+ Therapy Gardens are a way to provide horticultural therapy and are
usually led by a horticulture therapist. Typical sites for a therapy
garden are hospitals, senior centers and prisons.

¢ Demonstration Gardens are used to show the public different types
of gardening methods, composting techniques and plant varieties.
These are open to the public and used for demonstration classes.
Often they are managed by those who have received training in
horticulture and volunteer to educate the community on gardening,
such as Master Gardeners.

While its true that community gardens have plenty of benefits, there is also
a lot of hard work involved. A great deal of planning, organizing and group
decision-making goes on behind the scenes to make the garden work. Be-
fore you get started, determine if there is a broad desire for a garden. What
type best suits the community? Who will the garden serve?

Start a garden club. Once you determined what type of garden you want to
create, start a garden club. It sounds fancy, but this is just a formal way of
uniting your group. The club will help keep things organized and make sure
the work is divided up evenly. Clubs establish rules, review garden applica-
tions, make plot assignments, collect any dues, pay bills and resolve con-
flicts. Typically, a garden club has at least two officers — a president and a
treasurer, but you may have more depending on your needs.

Community gardens can be used in schools, job training, horticultural therapy
or even demonstration gardens. Benefits include food production, exercise,
improving the environment, outdoor education and cultural opportunities,

=== New Page ===

Locate a site. Now that you have your garden club estab-
lished, you need to choose a site. To find and evaluate
potential garden sites, tour the neighborhood. Be sure
to consider churches, nonprofit organizations and
businesses — any group that may have land they’re
willing to donate.

Make sure your site has a nearby water source and
gets at least six hours of direct sun each day. Make sure
you understand the site's history: determine how its
been used previously and how its used now. You may
want to have a soil test performed to judge what changes
you'll need to make.Once you've found a potential
location, identify the owner of the land and get a lease
or agreement.

Identify resources. Community gardens can require a
great deal of equipment, supplies and knowledge. The
following questions can help you identify the resources
you'll need to make your garden a success.

* Does your group already have access to tools and other
gardening equipment?

¢ Will your site need to be plowed or tilled?

* Do you have access to compost or mulch?

* Is there a shed available for storage?

* Does your site need a fence?

* How will the site be cleaned (removal of trash,
branches, etc.)?

* Are there trees on the site that need to be trimmed?
* Will the site need to be mowed regularly?

* Will your garden club have to carry
liability insurance on the site?

* Are there any community
gardens or Master Gardeners
in your area that are already
established that your
garden club can
learn from?

Your garden design
can be as simple
or as elaborate
as you choose.

* Do you need a community organizer to help facilitate
your club?

¢ Are there local government agencies, non-profit groups
or businesses that are willing to sponsor the garden,
make donations or provide other means of support?

Plan your garden. Your garden design can be as simple
or as elaborate as you choose, but make sure to include
as many people as possible in its design to create a sense
of unity and keeps everyone involved in the project.
Measure the site and make a simple, to-scale site map.
Try using drawings or photos from
magazines or other gardens
for inspiration.

Some things to consider
when designing your garden
are the location and size of
your garden beds — be sure to
take into account existing trees,
shrubs and vegetation if you plan to
keep them. Plan for driveways
and pathways, and consider
incorporating common areas such
as picnic tables and grassy areas.
Don't forget details such as a place
for storage, compost bin and the
boundary of the site. And of
course, you will need a name
(and sign!) for your commu-
nity garden.

=== New Page ===

13 eNO!

Gartien Club Guidelines & Regulations

1. All gardeners are required to complete an application. A plot fee of $__ is

due by —___.

2. All gardeners are required to sign up for one of the garden jobs/crews listed on

page —_. Please contact the garden co-leaders for more information.

3. Garden meetings and work parties are scheduled throughout the season. Please
plan to attend to get to know your fellow gardeners and help with garden up-

keep and special projects.

4. Keep your plot and the adjoining pathways tended. If your plot appears to be
untended for a period of time, and you haven't contacted the garden monitor, you
will be contacted, and your plot may be assigned to another gardener. Call the

garden monitor if you need help or if you will be out of town for an extended

period of time. If you plan to discontinue use of your space, please let the monitor
know as soon as possible so that your plot can be assigned to another gardener.

5, Plant tall plants and vines in places where they will not interfere with your
neighbor's plot. Planting illegal plants is prohibited.

6. At the end of the gardening season, all dead plants and non-plant materials (string,
wire, wood metal, plastic, etc) must be removed and disposed of properly and all

gardens left neat and tidy. If your garden is not cleaned up by , you could lose

your gardening privileges for the next season or be reassigned to a new, smaller plot.

7. Pick up litter when you see i

8. Please put weeds and dead plants into the compost bin provided. Do not leave
them in the pathway. Any diseased plants or seedy invasive weeds are to be
bagged and put in the trash so as not to contaminate the gardens. Old woody

.. eir
2. t sistent and lock

rette butts are loaded with toxins.

plants are to be placed in the brush pile to be carted to the recycling a4

9. Do not apply anything to or pick anything from another i plot

express approval

0. Please do not leave the wate:

2.Pets, drugs (including alcohol), radios, boom boxes and fires are not allowed.

3. Please supervise children in the garden

A. For your safety, only garden during daylight hours.

5. Report theft, vandalism and unusual activities to the garden co-leaders and police.

6. Use common courtesy, be considerate of your gardening neighbors and ENJOY

7. Violation of Gardener Guidelines: If any of the guidelines are violated, you will be

contacted by phone or e-mail and have one week to address the violation. After one

week, if the violation has not been remedied you may lose your gardening privileges.

Common problems. Community gar-
den groups face many challenges, and
you are bound to experience problems
at some point in time. Rather than get-
ting discouraged, get more organized.
The key to a successful community
garden is not only being able to pre-
vent problems from occurring, but
being able to work together to solve
problems when they do appear.

One of the most common chal-
lenges is personal conflict within the
garden group. Strong leadership and
organization are crucial. Make sure
tules are spelled out clearly, and a
system is in place to enforce them.

These guidelines should include
participation requirements — weeding,
mowing, repairing equipment, etc. —
and consequences of failing to follow
through on agreed duties. A good
leader can go a long way in minimiz-
ing misunderstandings.

Set up a schedule. Plan to visit your
garden two to three times a week dur-
ing growing season. Write it on your
calendar or sticky note — since its not
located just outside your door it can be
easy to forget there’s work to do!

Plan meetings and workdays to
bring everyone together. This will help
the gardeners get to know each other
and become part of your gardening
community. Its also a great way to
communicate various jobs and
projects that need to be done to
keep the garden in shape.

Educate yourself. Make friends with
other gardeners. Experienced garden-
ers are an invaluable resource at your
garden. Pick their brains for gardening
tips, or visit their plots to see how they
stake tomatoes or trellis beans.

Check out books from the library.
Attend classes. Become a Master Gar-
dener. Have gardening mentors in

=== New Page ===

place to teach and encourage new members so they don't be-
come discouraged and give up. There’ always something to
learn about gardening. The more you learn, the more success
you'll have.

Stay safe. Know your non-gardening neighbors. Take time to
visit with them, learn their names and share extra produce.
Visit with them about how the garden works. You may be
surprised to find that people just assume that they can take
food from the garden because its a community gar
be sure to harvest produce on a regular basis. Some people
use the excuse that “a lot of food is going to waste” to justify
taking food from a garden without permission.

Put a border or fence around your plot if your gar
rules allow it. Even a simple barrier can be a deterr
Report theft, vandalism and unusual activities to gar
ers and the police. The mor
the garden, the mor
curbing unwanted activities.

And of course, use common sense. Even though your

ORDER FORM: Publication - DVD FCS10
Name
Address
City
State Zip Code

Exercise DVD for Adults & Senior Adults

Experienced gardeners are an invaluable resource for your garden.
Have them share their knowledge with the group or mentor new
members. The more you learn the more success you'll have!

Phone

Number of DVD's x$10= $ }
ipping and handling ($1 per DVD) = $_ :

TOTAL price = $

Get your exercise in one of two ways: all at once....
OR 10-minute chunks throughout the day

o

Research studies have long recommended 20 to 60 minutes of
physical activity most days of the week. However, new studies
are showing that exercising in several different episodes of at
least 10 minutes is just as effective as continuous exercise.

Check/MO {payable to Cooperative Extension Service) enclosed

To order, return completed order form
with check or money order to:
Cooperative Extension Service
Attn: Family and Consumer Sciences

The research-based Fit In 10 video can be done 2301 S. University Ave., litle Rock, AR 72204

for 40 minutes or you can pick and choose the
segments to create your Own exercise experience.

Order your copy today!

To pay with credit card, order online at
division.uaex.edu/publications

DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE OF AGRICULTURE
Ut RESEARCH & EXTENSION & EXTENSION
University of Arkansas System

United States Department of Agriculture, University of Arkansas, and County Governments Cooperating. The Arkansas Cooperative
Extension Service offers its programs to all eligible persons regardless of race, color, national origin, religion, gender,
age, disability, marital or veteran status, or any other legally protected status, and is an Affirmative Action/Equal Opportunity Employer.

ENDLESS G;

=== New Page ===

Apples

Blackberries

Black Eyed Peas
posta

4 potatoes, {hen cool jalice apples:

Cook swee i" glices. Peel, CO anc a buttered Broccoli

into 3/4-1n© otatoes and apples e ‘op -_ Syn Boon

1a ch gas baking ae with sugar ean

puter OF MATER ake at STE Cabbage

Vv! .
rin

Carrots

Cauliflower

Cantaloupe

vas
Q
Aafinanaid

Collard

Cucumbers

Eggplant

English Peas

Grapes
Green Beai

Lettuce

Muscadines

Nectarines

Indicates summer months

=== New Page ===

=== New Page ===

Okra
Couslless Spiruch Fe } Onions
Vegetable cooking spray Peaches
3 egg whites or egg substitute
lc. flour Pe
ppers
lc. fat-free milk

4 tsp. fresh minced garlic or
L tsp. baking powder

12 oz. shredded low-fat cheese

4c. fresh, washed and chopped spinach
(or one package frozen chopped spinach)

4 tsp. garlic powder Plums

Potatoes (white)

Pumpkin
Preheat oven to 350 degrees. Coat a 9” x 13” Radish
pan lightly with vegetable cooking spray. Beat Raspberries
eggs well. Add flour, milk, garlic and baking
powder. Stir in cheese and spinach, and pour

mixture into the pan. Bake for 35 minutes or
until lightly browned.

Spinach

Strawberries

Makes 6 servings, Calories: 204, Fat: 4.5 g,

Protein : 20 g, Fiber: ] 8, Carbohydrate: 20 g,
Sodium: 490 mg,

Cholesterol: 13 mg

Summer Squash

Sweet Corn

>

= /
Se f'

Sweet Potatoes

Tomatoes

‘A

Ii

Turnip Greens

Watermelon

Winter Squash | Pash Shawn fog Sauce

1

i shed

1 pint fresh strawberries, Wa) 7
vith caps removed

4c. sugar

. rl
bine strawbe
r, compbin
od processor,

aan n chill. Serve over cl

vanilla. Puree, the

soc: 3
. ons, Calories:
Serving Size = 2 tablesp in: 0 g, Sodium

; Cholesterol: 0 mg, Prote

=== New Page ===

vp] May | wne | voy | mua | SEPT | oct
_ vow | ore |

tsp. fresh lemon or lime juice
tsp. vanilla extract

ies, sugar or lime lemon juice and

stard, ice cream or pound cake.

|, Fiber: 0.5 g, Carbohydrate: 8 g,
0.5 mg, Fat: 0 g

Indicates summer months

=== New Page ===

endless timing

University of Arkans

23

Loud sounds over 85 decibels
can damage nerves and
produce permanent hearing
loss. Powered gardening
tools such as lawn mowers,
hedge trimmers and tillers
can cause permanent dam-
age to your hearing in just

minutes. Don't forget to

wear adequate hearing

protection in the garden!