# Document 121996

DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE OF AGRICULTURE
RESEARCH & EXTENSION & EXTENSION

University of Arkansas System

=== New Page ===

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Quick Facts. ............... 3
Ahead ofthe Curve... 2.2... 2... 6
Arkansas Counts on Agriculture... . . . . 8
Commodity Production and Value, 2021. . . . 10
Five-Year Production Highs, 2017-2021 ... . 11
Census of Agriculture Highlights . 2. 2... 12
Arkansas Agriculture Snapshot. ..... . . 14
Economic Contribution of Agriculture... . . 18
Total Contribution. ............ 22
Value Added Contributions... ...... 23
Employment Contributions. ....... . 24
Labor Income Contributions. . . . 2... 25

Promoting Agricultural and Rural Sustainability

Precision Agriculture Research . 2 2 1 2... 26
Agriculture's Contribution Across the U.S. . . . 32
Arkansas Is OurCampus........ . . 34

Sources... ...........2.2.. .35

=== New Page ===

QUICK FACTS

Arkansas Agriculture contributed
14.3% of the state value added
WHICH IS APPROXIMATELY

$19.0 vate ater

In20el

AL /.

of Arkansas land was
comprised of farms.

42,000 Farms on 14.0 million acres

with an average farm size of 333 acres.

OB 38 2B 38 a8 68

37% of the stateis comprised of forests.

888 = 1,000 FARMS

=== New Page ===

In 2021, Arkansas average farm real estate
value was $3,390 ner acre.
* Total farm real estate value: $47.5 billion
* Average cropland value: $2,930 per acre
-irrigated cropland: $3,420 per acre
-non-irrigated: $2,130 per acre
* Average pasture land: $2,700 per acre

Organic production in Arkansas grew significantly from
202 to 2017, By 2017, the number of farms selling
organically produced commodities had increased from
32 farms to 69. During this time, Salles of organic
products increased by almost 3,000
hercent, from $789,000 in 2012

to over $24 million in 2017.

Source: USDA NASS, 2021; USDA NASS, 2019

=== New Page ===

In 2020, Arkansas’ top commodities
in terms of cash farm receipts? were:

Broilers

wy

Soybeans Rice
$2,682 Million ' $1,565 Million ' $1,118 Million

Chicken
Eggs Corn

$568 Million $516 Million $4176 Million

i)

Cattle/Calves

cdl

$426 Million $422 Million ' $368 Million’

Source: USDA ERS, 2022a; AFRC, 2022

“Cash farm receipt values do not include government payments received by farmers,
“Timber value is listed in terms of stumpage value paid to landowners

for standing timber.

>

wu

=== New Page ===

Ahead of the

Arkansas consistently ranks in the

for agricultural cash farm receipts.
In 2020, Arkansas ranked

15th in the Nation

—— WilH ———___

$8.2
BILLION

for total agricultural cash receipts.

¢ No. 13 in animals and animal products
valued at $4.2 billion.

¢ No. 16 in crops, valued at $4.0 billion.

Source: USDA ERS, 2022a
“This estimate represents only crop and animal production; the value of
government payments and tenber ed.

=== New Page ===

Arkansas is in the top 25 states in the production

of the following agricultural commodities:

(2021 Production Year)*
°No.1in Rice

¢No. 3 in Broilers

¢No. 3 in Cotton (upland)
No.3 in Cottonseed

¢No. 4in Catfish (foodsize)
°No. 5in Turkeys

¢No.7in Peanuts

°No. 8 in Chicken Eggs
°No. 11in Beef Cows?
°No. 11in Soybeans

¢No. 17 in Com for Grain
°No. 17 in Hay

°No. 20 in Oats

°No. 23 in Cattle & Calves
°No. 24. in Hogs & Pigs
¢No. 25 in Honey

Note: Beginning

in 2016, the

USDA stopped
reporting values

for blueberries,
grapes, peaches,
ecans, tomatoes
and watermelons
for Arkansas. In
2020 reporting was
also discontinued
for sweet potatoes
and grain sorghum.
Therefore, annual
rankings are no
longer available for
these crops.

=== New Page ===

Arkansas Counts on Agriculture

ARKANSAS’ AGRICULTURAL SECTOR
is a vital and growing component
of the state's economy.

=== New Page ===

The Aggregate Agriculture Sector’ share of the state
economy is much greater for Arkansas than for any
contiguous state and for the averages of the Southeast
region and the United ARKANSAS

States. How much greater?
The Agriculture Sectors
share of GDP* in
Arkansas is:

The Agriculture Sector's Share of the State Economy

* 4.0 times greater than in Texas

+ 2.7 times greater than in Louisiana

+ 2.3 times greater than in Oklahoma

+ 1.7 times greater than in Missouri

+ 1.5 times greater than in Tennessee

* 1.3 times greater than in Mississippi

* 1.9 times greater than for the Southeast” region
+ 2.5 times greater than for the U.S. as a whole

s
FA
=
&
Fy
=
5
Ed

Source: USDC BEA, 2021; English, Popp, and Miller, 2021

‘Calculations based on the percent contribution of the Agriculture Sector to state GDP in
2020. GDP by state represents the market value of goods and services produced by the labor
and property located in a sate. GDP does not factor in the impact of subsidies and/or taxes
on products, which are captured in value added estimates.

‘The Southeast is defined by BEA to include the states AL, AR, FL, GA, KY, LA, MS, NC,

SC, TN, VA, and WY, and is not the sum of Arkansas’ contiguous states listed in the table

=== New Page ===

Commodity Production and Value, 2021

Acres Produ Value
Commodity Harvested (thousands) (thousands)
Broilers* N/A 7,464,200 LBS } $3,970,954
Soybeans | 3,010,000 153,510 BU | $1,949,577
Rice } 1,194,000 91,136 CWT } $1,257,677
Corn for Grain | 830,000 152,720 BU 824,688
Chicken Eggs* N/A] 4,248,700 EGGS 692,829
Turkeys* N/A 540,000 LBS 443,340
Cotton } 475,000 1,250 BALES 442,800
(upland)?
Timber N/A 22,696 TONS 408,795
Cattle & Calves N/A 504,488 LBS 384,617
Hay | 1,183,000 2,606 TONS 300,540
Cottonseed” N/A 397 TONS 100,441
Hogs & Pigs N/A 106,526 LBS $74,822
Wheat | 145,000 8,410 BU $55,086
Peanuts 35,000 175,000 LBS $42,000
Catfish NA 15,500 LBS $19,530
(foodsize)
Oats 6,000 540 BU $2,214
Honey N/A 850 LBS $1,760

Source: USDA NASS. AFR
“Total Poultry : rkeys, and Chicken Eggs): $5,107M
“Total Cotton Industry (Upland Cotton and Cottonseed):

=== New Page ===

Five-Year Production Highs, 2017-2021

Commodity (
Beef Cows (inventory)* 2019 1,091 HEAD
Broilers 2021 7,464,200 LBS
Catfish (foodsize) 2019 18,600 LBS
Cattle & Calves 2018 528,300 LBS
Chicken Eggs 2021 4,248,700 EGGS
Corn for Grain 2021 152,720 BU
Cotton (upland) 2019 1,506 BALES
Cottonseed 2019 472 TONS
Grain Sorghum‘ 2018 770 BU
Hay 2019 2,760 TONS
Hogs & Pigs 2019 122,837 LBS
Honey 2017 1,972 LBS
Oats 2017 680 BU
Peanuts 2020 182,400 LBS
Rice 2020 108,107 CWT
Soybeans 2017 178,500 BU
Sweet Potatoes 2018 1,056 CWT
Timber 2019 24,197 TONS
Turkeys 2020 595,200 LBS
Wheat 2021 8,410 BU

Note: Beginning in 2016, the USDA discontinued reporting for blueberries, grapes, peaches,
, and watermelons for Arkansas. Therefore, five-year production rankings are no
le for these crops.

Source: USDA NASS oon AFRC, 2022.

‘Beef co . : ised of “beef cows that
fers 500 pounds and over.
discontinued for Arkansas in 2016,

ates undisclosed for Arkansas in 2016 and 2017

“Estimates discontinued for Arkansas in 2020

ll

=== New Page ===

Release of the 2017 Census of Agriculture provides

the opportunity to highlight additional crops where
annual reporting is limited. The most recent Census
indicates that Arkansas ranks in the top 25 states by
value for the following 16 commodities.*

7 Value
Commodity (thousands) Rank

Baitfish $26,530

Sport or Game Fish $15,947
Greenhouse Fruits & Berries $245 3
Rabbits, Live $226 9

Other Aquaculture? $122

1
Mules, Burros, Donkeys $236 Ik
1

1
1

0
4
0

Trout $2,717 2
Goats (All) $2,271 22

Other Floriculture & Bedding
Crops $350 22

Other Food Fish? $10 22
Bulbs, Corms, Rhizomes & Tubers $57 2

5
Foliage Plants, Indoor $1,017 25

Additionally, the most recent Census of Agriculture
indicates that Arkansas ranks in the top 25 states in
acres harvested for the following 28 commodities.*

Source: USD: SS, 2019

“Rankings wi ied from values disclosed in the 2017 Census of Agriculture
Nondisclosure of values for some ay affect the ranking values shown in this table.
Commodities denoted as “other” refer to an aggregation of products not having a specific code
on the census report within their respective categories.

12

=== New Page ===

Commodity AcresHarvested Rank

Sorghum for Syrup 43 4

Turnip Greens 134 at
Blackberries & Dewberries 501 6
Pecans 15,736 6

Fescue Seed 78 7

Green Southern Blackeyed Peas 284 ll
Short Rotation Woody Crops 137 ll
Okra 82 ll

Figs 8 14

Watermelons 1,822 14

Hazelnuts 31 15

Mustard Greens 68 15

Tomatoes 952 15

Almonds 1 16

Other Non-Citrus Fruit? 26 16
Summer Squash 578 17

Forage 1,343,033 18

Other Nuts? 42 19

Persimmons 16 19

Collards 32 20

Grapes 956 21

English Walnuts 33 21

Squash, All 660 22

Peaches 669 23

Sorghum for Silage 1,021 23

Beans, Green Lima 6 24

Sweet Cherries 20 24
Blueberries 356 25

13

=== New Page ===

Arkansas Agriculture Snapshot

Arkansas’ diverse portfolio of livestock products and
crops supports the value of the Agriculture Sector
year in and year out.

Arkansas Ag Exports
In 2020, there were 42,200 farms in Arkansas (USDA
NASS, 2022a). These farms generated a net farm
income of $1,192 million (USDA ERS, 2022b).

For 2020, Arkansas ranked 15th in total agricultural
exports with a value of $3.6 billion (USDA ERS,
2022c). Soybeans generated the highest export value
for the state, bringing in $977 million in 2020. That
same year, Arkansas ranked in the top ten in the

nation for exports of four commodities:

No. lin rice (valued at $742 million)

°No.3 in broilers (valued at $379 million)
No.4 in cotton (valued at $489 million)

¢No. 4 in other poultry (valued at $147 million)

14

=== New Page ===

In 2020 Arkansas ranked 36th in overall GDP at $130.8
billion. However, when looking at the share of GDP
generated by agriculture, forestry, fishing, and hunting,
Arkansas ranked 15th overall in the nation (USDC BEA,
2021). In terms of agricultural cash farm receipts in
2020, Arkansas ranked 15th with a value of $8.2 billion,
contributing 2.3% to the U.S. total cash farm receipt

value. Arkansas ranked 13th in total crop cash farm
receipts at $4.2 billion and 16th in total livestock cash
receipts at $4.0 billion (USDA ERS, 2022a).

In terms of value, Arkansas’ top two commodities

for 2020 were broilers and soybeans. Bringing in

$2.7 billion, broiler production represented 32.5%

of all agricultural cash farm receipts in the state. At
$1.6 billion, soybeans contributed over 19.0% to total
Arkansas cash farm receipts in 2020. Rice also had a
large contribution with 13.6% of total agricultural cash
receipts ($1.1 billion) for Arkansas.

=== New Page ===

Arkansas Agriculture Snapshot

On the national level, Arkansas continued to

rank number 1 in rice and number 3 in broilers

in the country, with cash receipts comprising
almost 39.3% and 12.4%, respectively, of the

USS. total cash farm receipts for these commodities
in 2020.

Arkansas’ total cash farm receipt value decreased
3.7% between 2019 and 2020*. The animals and
animal products sector lost 17.3% of its value,
while the crops sector experienced an overall
gain in value of 16.7% during this time.

On the crop side, wheat saw the greatest gain with
cash farm receipt value increasing 89.9% between
2019 and 2020. Soybeans, peanuts, cotton lint,

‘Percentage comparisons between 2019 and 2020 values are based on real 2022
dollars. That is, our numbers are adjusted for inflation, which allows for a true
“apples to apples” comparison.

16

=== New Page ===

cotton seed, corn, oats, hay, and rice also showed
increases in value, growing by 29.0%, 28.0%, 27.4%,

18.4%, 10.1%, 8.0%,

6.4%, and 3.6%, respectively.

On the animal production side, turkey sales
saw the greatest gain at 24.9%. This was
followed by chicken eggs (12.3%) and mohair
with no change. All other animal sectors
showed a decline in cash receipt value from

2019 to 2020. This
(-55.3%), hogs (-3

includes farm chickens
.6%), broilers (-26.7%),

catfish (-16.0%), cattle and calves (-6.9%),
wool (-6.7%), and

oney (-4.1%).

17

=== New Page ===

18

Economic Contribution of Ag

The total economic contribution of the Aggregate
Agriculture Sector includes three areas of wealth
and job generation.

+ Direct Contributions are generated by
production and processing
of crops, poultry, livestock
and forest products.

cea)

+ Indirect Contributions result when agricultural
firms purchase materials and services

from other Arkansas businesses

— a very important

part of the economy in

many communities. = pe]

¢ Induced Contributions result when employees
of agricultural firms and their
suppliers spend a portion

of their salaries and ae. aa fri

wages within Arkansas. Pole ey
Government payments — payments made directly
to some recipients in the farm sector — are included
in the contribution analysis. Input providers

(fertilizer, pesticide and equipment manufacturers)
and retail locations (restaurants, grocery stores, lawn

=== New Page ===

and garden centers, etc.) are not considered part
of the Aggregate Agriculture Sector, but some of
the economic activity of these industries and other
retail stores and input providers is picked up as
indirect and induced effects and included in the
total contribution.

These contributions are reported in terms of
Jobs, Labor Income, and Value Added.

+ Jobs include all wage and salary employees, as
well as self-employed workers in a given sector.

¢ Labor Income consists of proprietary
income — which includes all
income received by self-employed
individuals — and wages,
which includes all
payments to workers
including benefits.

Value Added includes Labor Income plus indirect
taxes and other property-type income such as
payments for rents, royalties and dividends.
Value Added and Gross Domestic Product
(GDP) are equivalent measures in theory but
are estimated using different methods and

data sources.

19

=== New Page ===

20

Economic Contribution of Ag

AG-RELATED

$371 Million

2.0%
INDIRECT
$5,245 Million

son 21.6%
42.4% rom

20.4%

1.4%

VALUE ADDED:

Pet tage of
by the Aggregate TOTAL STATE
Agriculture Sector ee
in Arkansas, 2020

Source: IMPLAN, 2022; English and

Popp, 2022. Note: Presented in 2020 $s.

‘Value added is the sum of employee compensation, proprietary income, other
property type income and indirect business taxes. This includes contributions
generated by agricultural production and processing, but excludes retail sales
Government payments are included

=== New Page ===

WHICH 1S APPROXIMATELY

every

VALUE

ADDED
DOLLARS

and provides almost

RKANSAS

=== New Page ===

22

Economic Contribution of Ag

Agriculture and associated agricultural activities
are major contributors to the Arkansas economy.
The total economic contribution of Arkansas’
Aggregate Agriculture Sector includes all direct,
indirect, and induced effects generated through
agricultural production, processing, and
agriculture-related activities within the state.

Total Contribution of Arkansas Agriculture, 2020
© 243,165 Jobs -1 out of 7 Arkansas jobs

¢ $10,178 Million in Wages - 13.6% ofthe state total

* $12,079 Million in Labor Income-
14.8% of the state total

¢ $18,977 Million in
Value Added -

Slout of $7 Cen
in Arkansas tn Ud

Source: IMPLAN, 2022; ‘ im
English and Popp, 2022. €&

=== New Page ===

Area (Millions Contribution
Po
Po

The far-reaching contributions of agriculture are
seen in the distribution of Value Added*
throughout the economy.

Value Added Generated by Ag in Top Five NAICS Industries®

or (Millions)
fo Manufacturing |

Top Five Total $14,118
(74.4% of all Value Added generated by Agriculture)

IMPLAN, 2022; Englis
ided is the sum of

sh and Popp, 2022.
e compensation, proprietary income, other property type
s, This includes contributions generated by agricultural

S. Census Bureau 2-digit North American Industry
Classification System (NAICS) aggregation

23

=== New Page ===

24

Economic Contribution of Ag

Employment By the Aggregate Agricultural Sector in AR, 2020

Contributio Jobs of Total oof State
Area Contribution Total

Direct 144,358 59.4 8.9
Indirect 50,534 20.8 3

1
TOTAL| 243,165 oof 149 |

Arkansas’ Aggregate Agriculture Sector generates
employment in all 20 industries in the North
American Industry Classification System (NAICS)
used for economic analysis.

Jobs Generated by Ag in Top Five NAICS Industries*
Industry Jobs

Manufacturing 81,040

Agriculture, Forestry, Fishing and Hunting 64,130

Transportation and Warehousing 11,873

Health Care and Social Assistance 10,732
Wholesale Trade 10,643

Top Five Total 178,418

(73.4% of all Jobs generated by agriculture)

Source: IMPLAN, 2022; English and Popp, 2022.
*Groupings based on the U.S. Census Bureaus 2-digit North American Industry
Classification System (NAICS) aggregation

=== New Page ===

Labor Income Contributions

Labor Income By the Aggregate Agricultural Sector in AR, 2020

Value is further spread throughout the economy by
the spending of labor income by individuals whose
jobs are upheld by agriculture.

Labor Income Generated by Ag in Top Five NAICS Industries?

Manufacturing

Agriculture, Forestry, Fishing, and Hunting

7

Classification System (NAICS) aggregation.

=== New Page ===

Promoting Agricultural and Rural

From Satellites to Soil Tests...
PRECISION AGRICULTURE RESEARCH

Innovation has long been a driver for increased
productivity in agriculture. Between 1770 and 1800,
ollowing the introduction of metal-chisel and mold-
board plows, the number of hours to produce 100
bushels of wheat dropped by 30 hours. By 2020,
technologies would help reduce that to just 1.1 hours.

esearchers at the University of Arkansas System
Division of Agriculture are harnessing technology
and developing innovative uses for continued
productivity improvements.

One of the most fertile fields for innovation is remote
sensing with satellites and drones. Researchers use this
technology to help farmers manage fertility, disease, and
irrigation issues more efficiently, in less time.

Whether you call them unmanned
aerial systems (UAS), or unmanned
aerial vehicles (UAV), or simply
drones, these machines are increas-
ingly important tools for agriculture.

Dr Larry Purcell demonstrates
the use of drone remote sensing in
soybean research.

26

=== New Page ===

Sustainability

spatial resolutions enable fiel
decisions that were previous!

sub-field management wor!

‘oday’s UAS can provide field elevation models for
irrigation planning, multi spectral imagery for plant
vigor estimations, and high-resolution color imagery
used as field scouting aids,” said Jason Davis, extension
application technologist. “While this data has been
available for some time via satellite platforms, the ability
to collect this imagery on the fly and at unprecedented

id level management
ly impractical.”

With advances in data management, Davis said

flows may soon

become scalable with the increasing automation of
data collection, processing, interpretation, and field

application of this data which will likely lead to better
optimization of inputs and potential cost savings.”

27

=== New Page ===

Promoting Agricultural and Rural

Spotting Diseases

Terry Spurlock, extension plant pathologist, has
worked with satellites and drones for a decade to
spot plant disease in the field.

“Our overall goals are to understand the
distributions of plant diseases, how much

money they may cost growers, and gain a better
understanding of how we might recommend
changes to management that add value to a crop or
field above the cost of some application, because
we have a clearer understanding of the acreage
affected,” he said.

Spurlock sees excellent potential in combining the
right software, hardware, and satellite imaging to
simplify scouting fields. He is working to develop
a field scouting tool that uses publicly available
satellite imagery to identify areas that should be

28

=== New Page ===

scouted before a farmer

has to be in that field. He
said this could improve
scouting efficiency, even as
farms grow larger and the
number of farm workers
decreases, by delivering
weekly field information
using only smartphones and
a geolocation app.

“Over the almost decade-long time that our lab

as been involved in remote sensing, we have
earned that drones are wonderful research tools
offering high resolution imagery and flexibility in
operations,” Spurlock said. “Changes to regulations
ave also made acquiring data from drones much
easier. However, because they can only cover a few
fields in a reasonable amount of time, scaling them
to farm-sized applications is problematic.

“With satellite imagery, we don’t have that issue,
where we get entire images of the Delta each week.
However, the resolution isn’t as high as it is with
drones, and sometimes cloud cover can hinder
our ability to ‘see’ what is on the ground,” he said.
“Still, we have high hopes for satellite imagery as a
usable tool for our stakeholders.”

29

=== New Page ===

Promoting Agricultural and Rural

Seeing Genetic Potential from Above

Larry Purcell, Distinguished Professor of soybean
physiology, has used an off-the-shelf aerial drone to
dentify soybean plants with the genetic make-up,
or genotype, for high nitrogen fixation rates. This
biological function is essential for producing grain
with high protein concentrations.

trogen is a major component in chlorophyll and
plant enzyme known as RuBisCO, both key in
roducing fuel for plant growth and seed development.

»

trogen and chlorophyll concentrate in plant tissues,
and the concentrations in the leaves are indicative
those throughout the plant. Traditional means of
measuring those concentrations require taking plant
tissue samples for analysis in a lab.

°

Using a color index developed by Arkansas turfgrass
researchers, Purcell links a plant’s green depth to
specific genetic markers. His
data help breeders know

Aerial images of soybean
plots showing differences
among genotypes in the
intensity of greenness, which
is measured using the dark
green color index.

30

=== New Page ===

Infrared image

of soybean plots
photographed from
400 feet. Soybean
plots appear as dark
rectangles, which are
relatively cool.

which soybean genomes are good candidates for
crossbreeding. Moreover, the genetic markers help
track which offspring from those crosses have the
desired nitrogen fixation trait.

Additional research in the Purcell laboratory has used
an infrared camera on a drone to measure soybean
canopy temperature during drought. A cooler canopy
of a soybean variety indicates that the plant still has
access to soil moisture compared to varieties with a
warm canopy. This research has identified additional
genetic markers that are being used to transfer the
“cool canopy markers” to a high-yielding variety.

Decision Tool

Aurelie Poncet, assistant professor of precision
agriculture, is collaborating with colleagues to
create a web-based decision tool that uses drone or
satellite images to help farmers pinpoint the field
sections that require additional nutrients. The team

31

=== New Page ===

Promoting Agricultural and Rural

includes Trent Roberts,
professor-soil fertility; Larry
Purcell, Distinguished
Professor of soybean
physiology; and Jason
Kelley, extension corn and
feed grains agronomist.

Roberts said farmers

usually take plant tissue
Graduate students samples to make the
download soil data determination. The
collected using Time- web-based tool would
Domain Reflectometry enable farmers to use
(TDR) sensors. off-the-ground images

to determine the timing
and quantity of nitrogen needed. Sounds easy, but
Poncet said the equations involved in making those
decisions are not.

“We have done the research — about half of it,”
she said. “Now the question is, how do we make
it easily usable by the farmer.”

When released, the tool will provide a “yes” or “no”
answer on whether corn nitrogen fertilization is
adequate. Roberts said the team is working on fine-
tuning the tool to provide recommendations on the
amount of nitrogen per acre.

32

=== New Page ===

Help During Disasters

The Division o
satellite imagery and information from the
National Agricultural Statistics Service to aid
disaster reporting and recovery efforts. Vic Ford
oversees agricul!
Cooperative Extension Service. Ford and Davis
worked during
the damage and
to regulatory agencies, elected officials, and the

farmers t

Agriculture has also used public

ture and natural resources for the

several major floods to assess
provide accurate information

emse!

Ives.

“We turned this information over to the economists.

We had q
the flood
Ford said.

. “This

uantified affected acreages in 48 hours after
and economic impact within 72 hours,”

is a drastic decrease in the time

required which was 10-14 days.

“We used

county agents and agronomists to

ground-truth our estimates and made adjustments

=:

33

=== New Page ===

34

Promoting Agricultural and Rural

if needed while the preliminary figures were reported,”
he said.

Ford said he found out early how important it was to
develop a means to determine the effects of flooding.

“When I first started this job, a flood event started
Friday night and continued through Sunday,” he said.

“L was getting calls from administrators, media, and
regulatory agencies on the extent of damage on Saturday.

“The only method I had was field reports from agents
and agronomists, which takes time and effort as the
water recedes,” he said. Satellite images proved to be the
tool which made this possible.

Gauging Forest Health
Hamdi Zurqani, assistant professor of geospatial science
at the University of Arkansas-Monticello’s College of
Forestry, Agriculture and Natural Resources, is using a
drone to assess forest health.

“This drone will be utilized to characterize key
indicators of forest health and investigate statistical
relationships between forest health, such as individual
forest trees and species, and vegetation indices derived
from the drone imagery,” he said. “It will also be utilized
to calculate the trees’ heights and crown widths and use
this information to calculate how much carbon is held
in its above-ground biomass.”

=== New Page ===

Sustainability

for take off.

near-infrared
orest health

LiDAR stand

software and

Students and Dr. Hamdi Zurqani get a drone ready

Equipped with sensors that can read visible light and

bands, “this drone can be used to monitor
and detect early signs of stress,” Zurqani

said. “Also, with the LiDAR system, we can obtain fine-
resolution 3-D data on forest structure.”

s for light detection and ranging. It is a

remote sensing method that uses a pulsed laser to
measure range and generate precise 3-D data. UAM’s
LiDAR system comes with eight lasers. The LIDAR

data package can process and convert the

measurements into maps and graphics.

Combined with a Global Navigation Satellite

System rece:
centimeter-

iver, Zurqani is able to achieve
evel accuracy.

=== New Page ===

Promoting Agricultural and Rural

Agriculture's Contribution Across the U.S.
Economic impact and contribution analyses are
an increasingly popular method for illustrating
the importance of food, fiber, and forestry to state
and local economies. In 2015, CARS researchers
conducted a survey of agricultural economists
which showed vast differences in methods used to
conduct contribution studies. The survey results
suggested a need for further discussion, as well

as the development of additional resources to aid
researchers in conducting these types of studies.

CARS researchers have taken the lead in
opening this discussion and are working to
develop resources for enhancing the consistency
and clarity of contribution of agriculture
research. To provide a central location for
ongoing discussion and research, they have
launched a website called The Economic
Contributions and Impacts of U.S. Food, Fiber,
and Forest Industries.

The website contains a list of known
contribution and impact studies involving the
food, fiber, and forest industries in the U.S.
There are also several resources for researchers to

36

=== New Page ===

Sustainability

reference, as well as a forum to discuss
various topics. It can be found by visiting

economic-impact-of-ag.uada.edu

To have your study listed on the website, or to
join the discussion regarding the development
of common methodologies for agricultural
contribution studies, send us an email at
cars@uark.edu.

37

=== New Page ===

38

Arkansas |s Our Campus

The U of A System Division of Agriculture conducts
research and extension programs to support Arkansas
agriculture in its broadest definition.

Our employees include Cooperative Extension Service
faculty in all 75 counties and Agricultural Experiment
Station scientists, extension specialists and support
personnel on five university campuses, at five research
and extension centers, six research stations, and two
extension centers.

Division CES Headquarters, Little Rock Research Stations
Q AAES Headquarters, Fayetteville Associated Research & Extension Units
m Research & Extension Centers © County Extension Offices

=== New Page ===

‘SOURCES:

AFRC (Arkansas Forest Resources Center). 2022. Production and value data for 2017-2021.
Data by request only. http/Avwwafre.tamont.edwdefault. htm

English, L, J. Popp and W. Miller, 2021. Economic Contribution of Agriculture and Food to
Arkansas’ Gross Domestic Product 1997-2020. Research Report 1005. Arkansas Agricultural
Experiment Station, University of Arkansas System Division of Agriculture, Fayetteville
hhttps//agcomm,uark.edwagnews/publications/1005_Econ_Contrib_Agri_ Food_to_Ark_
GDP_1997-2020 pdf

English, L. and J. Popp. 2022, Economic Contribution of the Agricultural Sector to the
Arkansas Economy in 2020. Research Report 1007. Arkansas Agricultural Experiment
Station, University of Arkansas System Division of Agriculture, Fayetteville. https/agcomm,
uark eduagnews/publications/1007_Contrib_Agri_sector_Ark_Econ_2020.pdf

IMPLAN (IMPLAN Group LLC). 2022. IMPLAN System (data and software): 2020 Arkansas
state package. wwwimplan.com

USCB (United States Census Bureau). 2010. Quick Facts: Arkansas. httpsvAvww.census.gov/
quickfactVAR.

USDA ERS (U.S. Department of Agriculture Economic Research Service). 2022a. Annual
cash receipts by commodity, U.S. and States, 2008-2021F hutps:/Avwwers.usda.gov/
data-products/farm-income-and-wealth-statistics/data-files-us-and.-state-level-farm-income-
and-wealth-statistics/

USDA ERS (U.S. Department of Agriculture Economic Research Service). 2022b. Value added
by USS. agriculture (includes net farm income). https/Avwwers.usda, gov/data-products/farm-
income-and-wealth-statistice/data-files-us-and-state-level-farm-income-and-wealth-staistics/

USDA ERS (U.S. Department of Agriculture Economic Research Service). 2022c. State
Agricultural Exports, U.S. agricultural cash receipts-based estimates. https/Avwwers.usda,
gov/data-products/state-export-data/

USDA FS (USS. Forest Service), 2022. Forests of Arkansas, 2020. Forest Inventory
and Analysis: State Fact Sheets. https:/public.tableau.com/views/FIA_OneClick V1_2/
Factsheet?%3AshowVizHome=no,

USDA NASS (USS. Department of Agriculture National Agricultural Statistics Service)
2021. Land Values 2021 Summary. https:/usda library.cornell.edu/concern/publications/
pn89d6567.

USDA NASS (U.S. Department of Agriculture National Agricultural Statistics
Service). 2019. 2017 Census of Agriculture, https://www.nass.usda.gov/Publications/
AgCensus2017/index.php

USDA NASS (USS. Department of Agriculture National Agricultural Statistics Service)
2022a, Farms and Land in Farms: 2021 Summary. https://usda library.cornell.eduvconcern/
publications/3712m6524

USDA NASS (US. Department of Agriculture National Agricultural Statistics Service). 2022b,
ASS Quick Stats. Production and values data 2012-2022. https://quickstats.nass.usda gov.

USDC BEA (US. Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis). 2021. Regional
Economic Accounts: Annual Gross Domestic Product (GDP) by State. https/Avwwbea.
gov/regional/

The University of Arkansas System Division of Agriculture offers all its Extension and Research
programs and services without regard to race, color, sex, gender identity, sexual orientation,
national origin, religion, age, disability, marital or veteran status, genetic information, or any

other legally protected status, and is an Affirmative Action/Equal Opportunity Employer.

=== New Page ===

UA

DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE
RESEARCH & EXTENSION

University of Arkansas System

University of Arkansas System
Division of Agriculture
2404 North University Avenue
Little Rock, Arkansas 72207
(501) 686-2540
www.uada.edu