# Document 122159

2022 Crop, Livestock, &
Youth Demonstrations &
Programs

Greene County Cooperative Extension Service

Lance Blythe Dave Freeze Blake Davis Katie West
CEA- Staff Chair CEA- Agriculture CEA- 4-H Admin. Sp. III

DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE redeilenaaaiain

RESEARCH & EXTENSION MASTER

GARDENER

University of Arkansas System

=== New Page ===

Table of Contents

Potassium M anagement Project

Corn Hybrid Demonstration

Arkansas Rice Performance Trials (ARPT)

L ate-Season Soybean Potassium Demonstration
Poultry Litter Study

Row Crops Soil Health Study

Soil Health for Grazing Lands

Hay Show & Contest

Systemic Insecticide Demonstration- Carpenterworm Control

Greene County 4-H Livestock Project Group
Top Notch Intercollegiate Swine Judging Contest
Leadership Paragould Agriculture Day

Greene County Extension Soil Trends

Greene County Extension Annual U pdate
Greene County Extension Program Partners

Select the section title above to scroll to that section

UA

DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE
RESEARCH & EXTENSION

University of Arkansas System

MASTER
GARDENER

18
20
24
32
39
44
50
52
55
57
59
61
62
64

=== New Page ===

UA

DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE Arkansas is
RESEARCH & EXTENSION

University of Arkansas Sytem Our Campus

2022 Potassium Management Project

Investigator: Dr. Trent Roberts/Dr. Michael Popp Extension Agent: Dave Freeze
Producers: Blackburn Farm (Britt, Justin), Boyd Farm (Jason, Robin), Distretti Farm (Johnny, Nathan,

Ryan), Eason Farm (Carlos, Shane), Finch Farm (Braden, Shaun), Gray Farm (Brad, Randy),
Terry Gray, King Farm (Gary, Greg, Larry, Shannon), Brandon Martin, Newsom Farm
(Justin, Roy), Pigue Farm (Ashton, David, Clint, Ron), Rice Farm (Blaine, Danny, Nick,
Stacey), Roberts Farm (Dallas, Rob, Ronnie, Ryan)

Consultants: Dwight Brannon, Sterling Clifton, Jack Cox, Chris Murray, Lance Taylor, Lance Ramthun,
Mike Simmons, Charles Wood, Luke Zitzelburger

Location: Greene County, AR

Background:

In row crop production in Northeast Arkansas,
potassium (K) is the primary nutrient needed for
soybean production. For other crops (corn, cotton,
rice, etc.), it comes in a close second behind nitrogen
(N). A vast amount of research in the public and
private sector has shown when soil test K levels
become deficient, crops yields will be reduced
accordingly.

Potassium fertilizer makes up a large part of a row
crop farmer’s budget. Checking University of
Arkansas, Division of Agriculture (UADA) planning
budgets for 2023, K fertilizer expense was listed at
$41,$41 , and $72/acre , for soybeans, rice, and corn,
respectively. These figures pencil out to 7, 4, and 8 % i
of the total budget for soybeans, rice, and corn, respectively.

It is noteworthy that in 2022, primary fertilizer sources, including potash (K fertilizer), were up significantly

due to supply chain disruptions and other economic and political influences seen in the global community we
operate today. Potash was in the $900 per ton ballpark in 2022, running 2-3 times what it had been in recent

years.

The good news is that UADA scientists and economists have worked together to develop tools to help farmers,
and others in the row crop industry, fine tune K nutrient management. Along with routine soil sampling
regularly used to determine crop nutrient needs, University officials have recently developed the Potash Rate
Calculator (PRC) computer program to help refine the units of potassium (K2O) fertilizer needed at planting,
based upon a profitable response.

Researchers have also further developed the procedures for collecting and analyzing plant tissue samples (corn,
cotton, rice, soybeans) later in the season for K deficiency. They continue to refine computer models which
help predict whether tissue sample K levels are adequate to meet the crops needs, or if corrective late season
potash is needed.

=== New Page ===

UA

DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE Arkansas is
RESEARCH & EXTENSION
University of Arkansas Sytem Our Campus
Objectives:

Evaluate the use of UADA K management tools to help farmers and consultants adjust early season K fertilizer
rates to a profitable level.

Monitor the need for late season K fertilizer based on plant tissue sampling and UADA predictive computer
models.

Determine if logistics and timing to collect plant tissues samples, submit them to the diagnostic lab, and receive
results and recommendations, will work for farmers and their crop advisors.

Project Setup:

Farmers and their crop advisors were enrolled in the K management project the winter/spring of 2022. A total
of 10 soybean, 8 rice, and 3 corn fields were included. Local project partners included 13 farms and 9
consultants. Key UADA K management tool developers (Dr. Michael Popp, Dr. Trent Roberts) were also
involved in the planning, implementation, and evaluation of the project.

Step | was to get soil sample results for each field
in the program. Local consultants graciously
provided results for several of the fields they had
recently sampled. The County Extension Agent
collected soil samples on the rest of the project
fields.

Step 2 was to generate PRC printouts for each field
to provide the producer with a K fertilizer rate
expected to be profitable. Soil test K levels were
keyed into the PRC program along with other input
data provided by the farmer (expected yield level,
expected crop price, current K fertilizer price), to
fine tune the units of K2O (k fertilizer) needed at
planting.

Step 3 was to collect plant (new leaf) tissue SP
samples later in the season, soon after the crops shifted from vegetative to reproductive growth, a and submit
them to the UADA diagnostic lab for analysis. The date was recorded the crop on each field reached the
beginning of reproductive development (R1 or first flower for soybeans, PI or green ring for rice, and V10 was
used for corn).

The first tissue sample for each field was taken 7-14 days after the project field reached reproductive
development. A second leaf sample followed 14 days after the first sample was collected, to help monitor plant
K levels, and to confirm whether late season corrective K fertilizer was needed or not.

Step 4 was to record the yield for each project field. Yields were then studied and compared to early season
soil test K levels, K fertilizer application at planting and late in the season, plant tissue results, and field notes.

=== New Page ===

UA

DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE Arkansas is
RESEARCH & EXTENSION

University of Arkansas Sytem Our Campus

SOYBEANS (Results in Tables 1 & la

Soil Test Results:

Based on soil test results, all 10 fields in the program would have required a K fertilizer application at planting
using current UADA standard recommendations. The average soil test K level for all project fields was 95 parts
per million (ppm), which falls into the UADA medium category, with a recommendation for 75 units (K20) of
K fertilizer.

Checking individual fields, only one had soil test K levels in the optimum (131-175 ppm) category, while three
fields fell in medium range (90-130 ppm), and 6 tested in the low range (60-90 ppm). The UADA lab
recommendation for fields testing optimum and low in soil test K, is 50 and 120 units K2O, respectively.

Potash Rate Calculator (PRC) Results:

When the PRC program was used (based on a profitable K fertilizer P R Cc

recommendation) only 7 of 10 fields in the project called for K

fertilizer at planting. Furthermore, the average K fertilizer suggested POTASH RATE

for all project fields was 100 units K2O0 using the UADA standard CALCULATORS
recommendation, and only 59 units using the PRC program.

0-0-60

The range for PRC recommendations of project fields was from 0 to 96 units K20. While the farmer estimated
yield plugged into the PRC for each farm was quite variable, the estimated price for potash ($900/ton) and crop
price ($14.80/bu) were consistent for each field.

Plant Tissue Results & K Monitoring Tool:
Averaged across all project fields, the first tissue sample was collected 10 days after the soybeans reached first

flower (R1). The average leaf tissue K level (1.81 % K) was just above the UADA model trigger to recommend
corrective late season potash.

The range of K tissue levels for the first samples
was from 1.06 to 2.49% K. In addition, 5 of the
10 project fields had low enough K tissue levels
that late season K fertilizer was recommended.
Fields receiving a recommendation were all
suggested 60 units K2O0 (100 # potash).

Checking results of the second tissue samples
taken on project fields (average 24 days after R1),
1.68% K was the average K level. The range of K
levels was from 1.15 to 2.22% K. In addition, by
this time, one additional project field (6 of 10)
was now calling for late season corrective K
fertilizer.

=== New Page ===

UA

DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE
RESEARCH & EXTENSION
University of Arkansas System

UADA officials developed a computer program (Soybean

Soybean Tissue K Monitoring Tool
Tissue K Monitoring Tool) we were able to use to key in first
flower date, and leaf tissue sample dates and results. The

program then generated predictive yield curves (75, 85, and Varietyame[ “Extend fies] Maturty croup

95%). county“ sreene sae[— a)
A line graph was also shown giving the relative yield potential Planting Datel 0-May 82 (Flowerng) Date 00]
of a field plotted by the K tissue levels. The monitoring tool Baiieian aa Bs Lest x

suggested late season corrective K fertilizer any time plotted
tissue levels (dynamic critical K levels) fell under the predicted
95% yield curve (researchers note that below this level, K is
deficient and yield limiting).

(Enter data) (Enter data)
22Jun

Looking at 1“ tissue samples for our project fields, the average

dynamic critical K level was 92%, with a range for the 10
fields from 77-100%. Checking results for 2" tissue samples Minin eens etiee) eaten eiteiners, ORs
for our project fields, the average dynamic critical K level was x0 °
still at 92%, and ranged from 82 to 100%. s

Zz 10
Yield Results: ° ae
Yields for the project fields ranged from 30 to 74 bushels per ra
acre (bpa), with an overall 53 average. It is noteworthy that 9 an 8 7
yields fell some 10% short of the farmer estimated yield edie

potential for their fields.

One reason for this may be the delays seen in planting this season due to excessive early rains, along with
waterlogging of some of the fields, especially those on zero grade ground. Other reasons for lower-than-
expected yields could be the auxin herbicide injury seen on field S9, along with poor quality litter used on one
field, delayed irrigation on another field, and a 6 week heat wave/drought.

Discussion & Summary:

At planting time 7 of 10 of the project soybean fields called for K fertilizer according to the PRC, while 8 fields
ended up receiving K fertilizer at this time. An average of 68 units K20 was applied per acre, with a range from
0-120 units. In addition, 3 of the fields used poultry litter as part of their K fertilizer at planting.

Checking plant tissue results, four of the project fields did not need late season K fertilizer, and did not receive a
K fertilizer application.

Six of the project soybean fields observed tissue results that called for a late corrective potash application.
Three of these fields did receive a potash application. Two of the fields getting late season potash only made in
the 40 bushel yield range. One was 0 grade and had yield limitations due to drainage. The other had a wide
range of soil test K levels and most likely could have benefited from a K fertilizer application at planting. The
third field receiving late K fertilizer also received 80 units of K fertilizer at planting which may be why it
recorded a 64 bpa yield.

=== New Page ===

UA

DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE
RESEARCH & EXTENSION
University of Arkansas System

Two of the six fields that the K monitoring tool called for a K fertilizer application, just barely triggered the
need for an application, so we opted not to make a late season application on these fields. Also, one of them
had a soil test K level that was optimum, while the other was in the upper medium range.

The field (S9) in the project with the lowest tissue readings and lowest yield, received a good level of auxin
herbicide injury. This resulted in delayed crop development, and also made it a challenge to collect tissue

samples.

Leaf tissue sampling soybeans is a somewhat simple procedure. A consultant can collect 15-25 newly

developed, fully expanded, trifoliate leaves (without the petiole) to represent the field, as he is making his pest

scouting circle in a field. Trifoliate leaves are small and can easily be put in a pocket when scouting the field.

They also dry out fairly quickly on the truck dash in a paper bag, and are not too bulky to package up and mail

to the diagnostic lab. From sample submission until receiving UADA lab results was generally 7 days,
sometimes up to 10-14 days. Use of a private lab may speed up a client/consultant getting sample results.

RICE (Results in Tables 2 & 2a)

Soil Test Results:

Based on soil test results, 6 out of 8 fields in the program would have required a K fertilizer application at
planting using current UADA standard recommendations. The average soil test K level for all project fields
was 112 parts per million (ppm), which falls into the UADA medium category, with a recommendation for 60

units (K2O) of K fertilizer.

Checking individual fields, one had soil a soil test K level above optimum (> 175 ppm), one was in the

optimum (131-175 ppm) category, while five fields fell in medium range (90-130 ppm), and | tested in the very

low range (<60 ppm). The UADA lab recommendation for fields testing above optimum, optimum, and very

low in soil test K, is 0,0, and 120 units K2O, respectively.

Potash Rate Calculator (PRC) Results:

When the PRC program was used (based on a profitable K
fertilizer recommendation) only | of 8 fields in the project called
for K fertilizer at planting. Furthermore, the average K fertilizer
suggested for all project fields was 53 units K2O using the
UADA standard recommendation, and only 13 units using the
PRC program.

The range for PRC recommendations of project fields was from 0
to 105 units K20. While the farmer estimated yield plugged into
the PRC for each farm was quite variable, the estimated price for
potash ($900/ton) and crop price ($16.00/cwt) were consistent for
each field.

&

Sits

=== New Page ===

UA

DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE Arkansas is
RESEARCH & EXTENSION

University of Arkansas Sytem Our Campus

Plant Tissue Results & K Monitoring Tool:

Averaged across all project fields, the first tissue sample was collected 5 days after the rice reached green ring
(PI). The average leaf tissue K level (2.19 % K) was well above the UADA model trigger (1.6% K) to
recommend corrective late season potash.

The range of K tissue levels for the first samples
was from 1.44 to 2.94% K. In addition, only 1 of
the 8 project fields had low enough K tissue levels
that late season K fertilizer was recommended.
The field receiving a recommendation was
suggested 60 units K2O0 (100 # potash).

Checking results of the second tissue samples
taken on project fields (average 19 days after PI),
1.88% was the average tissue K level. The range
of K levels was from 1.68 to 2.18% K. In
addition, by this time, none of the project fields
were calling for late season corrective K fertilizer.

Yield Results:

Yields for the project fields ranged from 160 to
249 bushels per acre (bpa), with an overall 200 average. The average yield was comparable to the farmer
estimated yield potential (205 bu) for their fields.

Checking field notes, the lowest yielding field had a cultivar planted that is not in the high yield range but used
for weedy rice situations. Another couple of the fields had also just been leveled, contributing to their lower
yields reported. Finally, two of fields were planted late, and one received litter with low K values.

Discussion & Summary:

At planting time, even though only 1 of 8 of the project rice fields called for K fertilizer according to the PRC,
all 8 fields received K fertilizer at this time. An average of 65 units K20 was applied per acre, with a range
from 28-90 units. Three of the fields received poultry litter at planting (one was recently leveled), contributing
some to this elevated use of K fertilizer on these fields.

With the standard UADA soil test recommendation calling for K fertilizer on 6 of the 8 project fields, the
producers were making applications as they had been accustomed too. Rice project results show that producers
and consultants will need to gain confidence in pulling back on use of K fertilizer at planting when it is
recommended with support of soil test data and PRC profit rate predictions.

When tissue level results are considered, only 2 farmers applied late season K fertilizer. One did not get aK
fertilizer recommendation based on tissue results, but routinely mixes some potash in with urea to apply at boot
stage to hybrid rice.

=== New Page ===

UA

DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE Arkansas is
RESEARCH & EXTENSION

University of Arkansas System Our Campus

The farmer who did have a low K tissue reading, did make a late season potash application (60 units K2O) and
ended up with a good yield for the cultivar being grown.

Leaf tissue sampling in rice is a fairly easy process. A
consultant can collect 20-30 Y-leaves (only leaf blades,
from the newest leaves extending from the whorl, with
leaf collar showing) to represent the field as he is
making his weekly circle in the field to scout for pests.
The leave blades are small and can easily be put in a
pocket when scouting the field. They also dry out very
quickly on the truck dash and are very compact to
package up and send to the diagnostic lab.

CORN (Results in Table 3)

Soil Test Results:

Based on soil test results, all 3 fields in the program : —

would have required a K fertilizer application at planting using current UADA standard recommendations. The
average soil test K level for all project fields was 67 parts per million (ppm), which falls into the UADA low
category, with a recommendation for 120 units (K2O) of K fertilizer with yield goal of >200 bpa.

Checking individual fields, one had a soil test K level in the medium (91-130 ppm) category, while the other
two fields fell in the very low range (<60 ppm). The UADA lab recommendation for fields testing medium and
very low in soil test K, is 70 and 160 units K2O, respectively.

Potash Rate Calculator (PRC) Results:

When the PRC program was used (based on a profitable K fertilizer recommendation) only 2 of 3 fields in the
project called for K fertilizer at planting. Furthermore, the average K fertilizer suggested for all project fields
was 130 units K20 using the UADA standard recommendation, and only 80 units using the PRC program.

The range for PRC recommendations of project fields was from 0 to 121 units K20. While the farmer
estimated yield plugged into the PRC for each farm was variable, the estimated price for potash ($900/ton) and
crop price ($7.30) were consistent for each field.

Plant Tissue Results & K Monitoring Tool:

Averaged across all project fields, the first tissue sample was collected 8 days after the corn reached V10. The
average leaf tissue K level (2.00 % K) was a little above the UADA model trigger (1.75% K) to recommend
corrective late season potash.

The range of K tissue levels for the first samples was from 1.62 to 2.2% K. In addition, | of the 3 project fields
had low enough K tissue levels that late season K fertilizer was recommended. The field receiving a
recommendation was suggested 60 units K2O (100 # potash).

=== New Page ===

UA

DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE Arkansas is
RESEARCH & EXTENSION

University of Arkansas Sytem Our Campus

Checking results of the second tissue samples taken on project fields (average 28 days after V10), 1.68 % was
the average K level. The range of K levels was from 1.46 to 2.34% K. By this time, only field C2 was still
calling for late season corrective K fertilizer. This field received 100 # potash after seeing low K tissue levels
from our first sample.

Yield Results:

Yields for the project fields ranged from 168 to 190 bushels
per acre (bpa), with an overall 176 average. It is noteworthy
that yields fell some 15% short of the farmer estimated yield
potential for their fields.

One reason for this may be the delays seen in planting this
season due to excessive early rains, along with waterlogging
on one of the fields. One field also had cover crop and seemed
to get a slow start, plus we had a 6-week heat wave/drought.

Discussion & Summary:

Reviewing farmer K fertilizer applications, the 2 fields testing very low in soil test K, received K fertilizer (one
used 120 units commercial K and the other 57 units) near planting.

The PRC did not call for any K fertilizer for the field with the medium soil test report, but the Extension Agent
recommended 60 units K20 since the soil test report fell on the low end of the medium range and the farmer
was managing for very high yields (litter was used — 120 units K20).

Late season K fertilizer was only needed for one of the corn project fields based on leaf tissue samples. The
producer made a corrective potash (60 units K20) application and ended up with a nice yield on this field which
had soil tested very low for K.

The UADA K management program has merit for corn growers but note the following as you get ready to
sample.

1. When tissue samples are collected, it is sometimes
challenging to know when a field reaches V10, since
the plants first 2-3 leaves often deteriorate and cannot
easily be seen.

2. Collect 4-5 leaves for your sample. Submit only leaf
blades collected from the uppermost fully collared leaf
or from the leaf subtending the ear.

3. With corn being so tall when tissue samples are taken,
it makes it harder to get composite samples that
represent the whole field.

4. Leaves are much larger to sample (compared to rice &
soybeans), so fewer leaves can be collected and
prepared to ship per tissue sample. Drying also takes
longer.

5. When collecting leaf samples, corn is often shedding pollen, so face (eye, mouth) and body protection
are needed to avoid health issues and irritation.

=== New Page ===

University of Arkansas System, Division of Agriculture
Greene County K20 Management Soybean Program 2022

Table 1: Soil Test, Potash Rate Calculator (PRC), & Plant Tissue Sample, Information & Results

Crop Soybean Soybean Soybean Soybeans Soybean 10 fields
Est. Yield - Bu./Acre 50 75 60 75 65 59
Est Grain Nutrient Removal - #K20/A 60 90 72 90 78 65
Crop Price - $/Bu. $14.80 $13.50 $14.80 $14.80 $14.80

Potash Price - $/ton $900 $820 $900 $900 $900

Soil Test Report Date April 7th 2022 2021 2021 2020 March 31st 2022

Soil Test K Level - VL,L,M,O,AO Optimum Low Low Low Low

Soil Test K Level Ave - PPM

Soil Test K Level Range - PPM
Soil Test Rec K Rate - #K20/A

PRC refined Rec K Rate - #K20/A
PRC Profit Max Rec K Rate - #K20/A
Ext Agent Adjust Rec K Rate - #K20/A

Potash applied at planting - #K20/A 35 80 0
Poultry litter at planting - #K20/A 71 120
Total Preplant - #K20/A 106 80 120

Soybean R11 (First Flower) Date July 17th July 30th June 22nd June 10th cP

Tissue Sample #1 Date July 29th R2-12 August 9th R2-11 August 9th R2-9 June 29th R2-7 June 21st R2-8
Tissue Sample days past R1 12 8 10 7 11

Tissue Sample #1 - % K 2.14 2.08 2.16
Est % Yield - Dynamic Critital K Level
Recommended - #K20/A

Late Season K Applied - #K20/A

Tissue Sample #2 Date Aug 10th R3-15 August 23rd R4-15 August 23rd July 14th R2-10 July 6th R3-12
Tissue Sample days past R1 24 22 24 20 26

Tissue Sample #2 - %K 1.97 2.19 1.8
Est % Yield - Dynamic Critital K Level
Recommended - #K20/A

Late Season K Applied - #K20/A

Crop Yield Bu/A pos ee we

Field Notes: 38" rows-irrigation delayed — Late Doublecrop-1 ton litter K demo field-Late replant Wet-yield loss to drainage Good IR, drainage & soil

10

=== New Page ===

University of Arkansas System, Division of Agriculture
Greene County K20 Management Soybean Program 2022
Table 1a: Soil Test, Potash Rate Calculator (PRC), & Plant Tissue Sample, Information & Results

Crop Soybeans Soybeans Soybeans Soybeans Soybeans
Est. Yield - Bu./Acre 50 50 60 40 65
Est Grain Nutrient Removal - #K20/A 60 60 72 48 17

Crop Price - $/Bu.
Potash Price - $/ton

Soil Test Report Date Dec 13th 2021 May 6th 2022 April 13th 2021
Soil Test K Level - VL,L,M,O,AO Low Low Medium

Soil Test K Level Ave - PPM 77 68 128
Soil Test K Level Range - PPM 10 8 17
Soil Test Rec K Rate - #K20/A 75

PRC refined Rec K Rate - #K20/A
PRC Profit Max Rec K Rate - #K20/A
Ext Agent Adjust Rec K Rate - #K20/A

Potash applied at planting - #K20/A
Poultry litter at planting - #K20/A
Total Preplant - #K20/A

Soybean R11 (First Flower) Date July 19th June 21st June 10th June 21st July 5th

Tissue Sample #1 Date July 29th R2-12 June 29th R2-8 June 22nd R2-8 July 6th R2-8 July 13 R2-9
Tissue Sample days past R1 10 8 12 15 8
Tissue Sample #1 - % K 2.49 2.26
Est % Yield - Dynamic Critital K Level 100 100
Recommended - #K20/A (e) 0

Late Season K Applied - #K20/A (0) 0

Tissue Sample #2 Date August 10th R2 July 14th R2-13 July 7th R2-13 July 20th R2 July 29th R2-14
Tissue Sample days past R1 22 23 27 29 24
Tissue Sample #2 - %K 2.22 1.7
Est % Yield - Dynamic Critital K Level 100
Recommended - #K20/A (e)

Late Season K Applied - #K20/A (0)

Crop Yield - Bu/A 68

Field Notes: Poor litter & poor drainage Visibal K deficiency Good IR, drainage, & soil Auxin herbicide injury Good beds & drilled

=== New Page ===

University of Arkansas System, Division of Agriculture
Greene County K20 Management Rice Program 2022
Table 2: Soil Test, Potash Rate Calculator (PRC), & Plant Tissue Sample, Information & Results

Crop Rice-PVLO3 Rice-Diamond Rice-RiceTec 753 Rice-DGL263 Rice-DGL263 8 fields
Est. Yield - Bu./Acre 190 215 180 220 210 205
Est Grain Nutrient Removal - #K20/A 30 34 29 35 34 33

Crop Price - $/cwt $16.00 $16.00 $16.00 $16.00 $16.00
Potash Price - $/ton $900 $900 $900 $900 $900

Soil Test Report Date May 9th 2022 2022 May 6th 2022 April 7th 2022 March 19th 2021
Soil Test K Level - VL,L,M,O,AO Above Optimum Medium Medium Optimum Medium

Soil Test K Level Ave - PPM

Soil Test K Level Range - PPM
Soil Test Rec K Rate - #K20/A

PRC refined Rec K Rate - #K20/A
PRC Profit Max Rec K Rate - #K20/A
Ext Agent Adjust Rec K Rate - #K20/A

Potash applied at planting - #K20/A
Poultry litter at planting - #K20/A
Total Preplant - #K20/A

Rice Pl (greenring) Date June 27th July 8th July 5th June 14th P|

Tissue Sample #1 Date June 29th 1/4" 1E July 13th 1/4"lE July 7th 1/4"IE June 29th 1"lE June 21st 3/4"lE
Tissue Sample days past PI 2 5 2 8 7

Tissue Sample #1 - % K 1.94 1.99 1.98 2.89

Tissue Goal - Adequate Level % K 1.6 1.6 1.6 1.6

Recommended - #K20/A (0) (0) 0 (0)
Late Season K Applied - #K20/A 0 0 18 0

Tissue Sample #2 Date July 13th 4"IE July 28th 5"lE July 20th 3"lE July 14th Early boot July 6th 4"IE
Tissue Sample days past PI 16 20 15 23 22
Tissue Sample #2 - %K 1.75 1.92 1.68 1.85 2.18
Tissue Goal - Adequate Level % K
Recommended - #K20/A

Late Season K Applied - #K20/A

Crop Yield - Bu/A

Notes Good yield for cultivar Abit late-Cache R bottoms Just leveled-0 grade, thin spots 0 grade - good stand & crop good stand & crop

12

=== New Page ===

University of Arkansas System, Division of Agriculture
Greene County K20 Management Rice Program 2022
Table 2a: Soil Test, Potash Rate Calculator (PRC), & Plant Tissue Sample, Information & Results

Crop Rice-DGL263 Rice-RiceTec 753 Rice-RiceTec 753
Est Yield - Bu./Acre 225 180 220
Est Grain Nutrient Removal - #K20/A 36 29 35

Crop Price - $/cwt $16.00 $16.00 $16.00
Potash Price - $/ton $900 $900 $900

Soil Test Report Date 2020 Dec 13th 2021 March 31st 2022
Soil Test K Level - VL,L,M,O,AO Medium Medium Very Low

Soil Test K Level Ave - PPM 108 101

Soil Test K Level Range - PPM 31
Soil Test Rec K Rate - #K20/A 60

PRC refined Rec K Rate - #K20/A 26
PRC Profit Max Rec K Rate - #K20/A 0
Ext Agent Adjust Rec K Rate - #K20/A 0

Potash applied at planting - #K20/A

Poultry litter at planting - #K20/A
Total Preplant - #K20/A

Rice PI (greenring) Date June 17th July 9th July 1st

Tissue Sample #1 Date June 22nd 1/2"IE July 14th 3/4"IE July 6th 1/4"IE
Tissue Sample days past Pl 5 5 5
Tissue Sample #1 - % K 2.94 2.36 1.97
Tissue Goal - Adequate Level % K 1.6 1.6 1.6
Recommended - #K20/A 0 (e) (e)

Late Season K Applied - #K20/A 0 (0) (0)

Tissue Sample #2 Date July 7th 6"IE August 4th Early boot July 20th 4"lE
Tissue Sample days past Pl 20 20 14
Tissue Sample #2 - %K 2.11 1.79 1.76
Tissue Goal - Adequate Level % K 1.6 1.6 1.6
Recommended - #K20/A 0 (e) (e)

Late Season K Applied - #K20/A 0 (0) (0)

Notes: O grade, early, good crop poor litter, 0 grade, late 0 grade-just leveled, good litter

13

=== New Page ===

University of Arkansas System, Division of Agriculture
Greene County K20 Management Corn Program 2022
Table 3: Soil Test, Potash Rate Calculator (PRC), & Plant Tissue Sample, Information & Results

Crop Corn Corn Corn 3 fields
Est Yield - Bu./Acre 200 200 245 215
Est Grain Nutrient Removal - #K20/A 50 50 61 54
Crop Price - $/Bu. $7.30 $7.30 $7.30

Potash Price - $/ton $900 $900 $900

Soil Test Report Date

Soil Test K Level - VL,L,M,O,AO Very Low Very Low

Soil Test K Level Ave - PPM 55
Soil Test K Level Range - PPM
Soil Test Rec K Rate - #K20/A

PRC refined Rec K Rate - #K20/A
PRC Profit Max Rec K Rate - #K20/A
Ext Agent Adjust Rec K Rate - #K20/A

Potash applied at planting - #K20/A
Poultry litter at planting - #K20/A
Total Preplant - #K20/A

Corn V10 Date June 10th June 15th June 15th ta

Tissue Sample #1 Date June 21st V11 June 22nd V13 June 22nd V13
Tissue Sample days past V10 11 7 8
Tissue Sample #1 - % K 2.2 2.19 2.00
Tissue Goal - Adequate Level % K 1.75 1.75
Recommended - #K20/A 0 20

20

Late Season K Applied - #K20/A 0

Tissue Sample #2 - %K 2.34 2.21
Tissue Goal - Adequate Level % K 1.75 1.75
Recommended - #K20/A 0 0

Late Season K Applied - #K20/A 0 P 0
crop Yield -Bu/A

Notes: Cover crop, no-till Soil & tissue K low O grade, excess rain-water

Tissue Sample #2 Date July 6th R2 July 20th R3 July 7th R2
Tissue Sample days past V10 26 22 28
2.00
1.75
20
0

14

=== New Page ===

POTASH RATE

Profit-Maximizing K Rate Calculator for Irrigated Soybeans PRC )\.

as developed by Dr. M. Popp, Dr. N. Slaton, and Dr. T. Roberts CALCULATORS
What is your expected soybean price? 14.80 $/bu O Metric
What do you expect to pay for muriate of potash fertilizer? 900 $/ton 0.75 $/Ib of K20
What is the yield potential of your field? 50 bu/acre
What is your soil-test K value (STK) and range? 113 ppm Soil test range +/- 10
What is your cost to apply fertilizer (equipment, labor, fuel or custom)? 7.50 $/acre ..your rate in lbs of K2O/acre: 55
Profit change comparing applying at 10.1Ib K,O/acre to no fertilizer: -6.94 S/acre Profit-max rate over your rate: $5.90

The fertilizer does not generate enough
revenue to pay for itself and costs to apply

Estimated Yield Response to K Fertilizer and Profit-Maximizing Application Rates for a Range of
Initial Soil-Test K Values (STK) at Specified Yield Potential

———-Est. Yield (STK = 123)

—Est. Yield (STK = 113)

weeeee Est. Yield (STK = 103) + |
\ Obs. Yields (103 < STK < 123) eG §

40 °
J)10+0.3 \- 3541.0 .

@ Profit-maximizing rate +/- 95% C.l.

35 4 S( OIL

Soybean Grain Yield (bu/acre)

30 T T T T T T T
i¢) 25 50 75 100 125 150 175 VA
DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE

Fertilizer-K Application Rate (Ibs KzO/acre) RESEARCH & EXTENSION

Disclaimer: This software is provided ‘as is’ and without warranties as to performance or merchantability. Further, statements may have been made to you about this software, and they do not constitute warranties and shall not
be relied upon by the user to use the program or act on its results. This program is provided without any expressed or implied warranties whatsoever. Because the diversity of conditions and hardware under which this program
may be used, no warranty of merchantability or warranty of fitness for a particular purpose is offered. The user is advised to test the program thoroughly before relying on it. The user assumes the entire risk of using the program.
The authors will not be liable for any claim or damage brought against the user by any third party, nor will the authors be liable for any consequential, indirect, or special damages suffered by the user as a result of the software.
Results pertain to silt loam soils common in major rice producing regions of the humid mid-Southern U.S.

15

=== New Page ===

% Leaf K

Soybean Tissue K Monitoring Tool

Grower Name| __NickFox _| Field Name} Mangrum North
Variety Name Extend Flex Maturity Group V

Planting Datel 10-May__—‘| R1 (Flowering) Date!

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

Sample

WOAN OU BPWN PRP

my
(=)

@ Field Data

e B
e
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80

Sample Date Leaf % K
(Enter data) (Enter data)

Trifoliolate Leaf Sufficiency
— 95% Sufficiency 85% Sufficiency = —75% Sufficiency

Days After R1 Stage

16

=== New Page ===

DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE
Ut RESEARCH & EXTENSION
University of Arkansas System

This soybean tissue K monitoring tool was designed to help

easily diagnose in-season K deficiencies with trifoliolate leaf

lab results. Only trifolioliate leaf (not including petioles)

from the uppermost fully expanded leaf should be compared

to the critical concentrations shown. x
i

Instructions:

Rb

. Enter planting date (required)
. Enter date of R1 or first flower (required)
Use SoyStage to estimate R1 date if unknown:
. Enter date each sample was taken (required)
. Enter leaflet K concentration from lab analysis (required)
. Green dot will appear on the figure
. Symbols below the red line are K deficient

N

nu sw

Understanding Your Results:

The graph shows the dynamic critical potassium (K) concentration thresholds for
reproductive soybean. Critical concentrations determine the nutrient status at which below
is considered deficient and yield limiting, and above which is considered sufficient. The three
lines indicate the critical concentration for relative grain yield goals of 95% (red), 85% (blue),
and 75% (black). Any point below the red 95% relative grain yield goal critical
concentration is deficient and yield limiting. The 85% and 75% grain yield lines are shown to
help the user understand the potential yield loss if left unmanaged. If a field is deficient, an
in-season corrective application of granular K fertilizer can correct the deficiency and prevent
yield loss when applied correctly.

Fertilizer Timing:

The granular K fertilizer must be applied and incorporated with irrigation or rainfall within 20
days after R1 (A) in severely deficient situations and within 44 days after R1 (B) for hidden
hunger to prevent yield loss. After this point, yield loss is anticipated and a corrective
application can only minimize the loss, not prevent it.

Fertilizer Rate:
60-120 Ibs K,O per acre depending on the severity of the situation. Ongoing research intends
to improve this rate and calibrate it to the leaf K concentration.

17

=== New Page ===

UA

DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE Arkansas is
RESEARCH & EXTENSION
University of Arkansas Sytem Our Campus

2022 Corn Hybrid Demonstration

Partnering: Derek & Royce Boling Ext. Agent: Lance Blythe / Dave Freeze
Investigator: Dr. Jason Kelley

Location: Paragould Soil Series: Calhoun Silt Loam

Objective: Accumulate yield, agronomic, and disease tolerance support data of corn hybrids entered

in the UA System, Division of Agriculture, county performance trials. Determine local
yield potential and adaptability of commercially available hybrids.

Previous Crop: Soybeans

Tillage, Planting, & Demo Setup:

Conventional seedbed prepared and planted on 30-inch beds
on April 30". Included 12 hybrids - 8 rows of each hybrid
were planted.

Crop Development, Irrigation, & Weather:
A wet spring delayed planting again this year. The drought was a struggle and seemed to have affected corn yields
county-wide. Furrow irrigation was used in this field.

Fertility & Pest Control:

At planting, a 60-23-80-12 fertilizer was applied. A
sidedress fertilizer (161-0-39-12) followed at the 5-leaf
growth stage. At pretassel, 46-0-0 was applied. The total
units of fertilizer for the season were 267-23-119-24.

Warrant & Atrazine were applied preplant. Acuron, Atrazine,
Besiege and Trivapro were used during the growing season
as needed.

Discussion & Results:

The plots were harvested on September 16". Yield data was
collected using a weigh wagon and a moisture/test weight
meter provided by Adam Rawls with AgriGold.

Yields were adjusted to 15.5% moisture (Table 1). Yields
ranged from 237 to 274 bushels per acre. The average yield
was 258 bushels.

18

=== New Page ===

Table 1: 2022 Corn Hybrid Demonstration
Greene County Cooperative Extension Service

Derek Boling, Royce Boling Investigator: Dr. Jason Kelley
Paragould/Greene County County Agent: Lance Blythe & Dave Freeze

Justin Threlkeld Consultant: Shane Frost

April 30, 2022 Soil Type: Calhoun silt loam

Sept. 16, 2022 Previous Crop: Soybeans

Row Length x Width: 1200 ft. x 30 in.

Fertility: (Ib/ac) N P K Ss 2n Herbicides:
--- Preplant 60 23 80 12 0 Warrant
--- Sidedress 161 0 39 12 0 Atrazine
---_Pretassel 46 0 0 0 0 Acuron
Total Fertility: 267 23 119 24 0 Atrazine
Besiege
Boron 32 oz/A
Fungicide:
Trivapro
Irrigation Type: Furrow Number of Times: Multiple
DynaGro 55VC80 268.2 0.550 8,492 275.7 17.8 62.0 34,500 1
Pioneer 1718 268.0 0.550 8,622 279.9 19.1 61.5 35,500 2
Dekalb 67-94 264.7 0.550 8,422 273.4 18.2 62.0 33,500 1
AgriGold 645-16 263.5 0.550 8,334 270.6 17.7 63.0 35,500 1
Progeny 2118 263.0 0.550 8,356 271.3 18.1 64.1 36,000 1
Revere 1307 261.0 0.550 8,244 267.7 17.6 60.4 35,500 1
Dekalb 62-70 260.4 0.550 8,194 266.0 17.3 63.1 33,500 1
AgriGold 66-59 257.7 0.550 8,200 266.2 18.2 61.9 34,500 1
Pioneer 1222 257.3 0.550 8,098 262.9 17.3 61.8 35,500 1
DynaGro 57VC53 251.1 0.550 8,078 262.3 19.1 63.8 30,500 1
Revere 1898 * 244.7 0.550 7,682 249.4 17.1 63.6 34,000 1
Progeny 2015 242.2 0.550 7,782 252.7 19.0 60.2 34,000 1

' Yield is adjusted to 15.5% moisture.
2 Plant Stand is given as thousands of plants per acre.
3 Lodging score - 1 is no lodging, 10 is completely lodged.

This variety had ~800 feet of one row that was not planted. Yield data should not be compared to other varieties.

Special thanks to Andy Vangilder & Chris Elkins assisting with planting.
Special thanks to Adam Rawls for harvest help & weigh wagon.

DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE
RESEARCH & EXTENSION

University of Arkansas System

19

=== New Page ===

UA

DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE
RESEARCH & EXTENSION

University of Arkansas System

2022 Arkansas Rice Performance Trials (ARPT)

Partnering: Pigue Farm (Ron, Clint & crew) Investigator: Dr. Jarrod Hardke

Crop Advisor: Charles Wood Program Associates: | Lauren Amos/Donna Frizzell
Location: Paragould Soil Series: Jackport silty clay loam
Objective: Evaluate rice hybrids/varieties entered in the UADA Performance Trials, under farm level

management. Determine local yield potential and pest (disease & insect) reaction of
commercially available hybrids/varieties.

Tillage and Planting:

Soybeans were planted on the trial field in 2021. It was precision
leveled and flood irrigation was used. Conventional tillage (field
cultivator, Kelley tool) was used to prepare the field for planting.
The ARPT small plots were planted May 11".

Demo Setup & Weather:

The test included 30 cultivars (8 drill rows of each), replicated 4
times. A nice shower after planting resulted in the plots coming
up to a good DDS0 stand by May 18". The test was harvested

using a small plot combine on September 21‘. The farmer’s Woes re : Ls Se
field was planted to RiceTec 7401, and cut in the 180-bushel Asma plo drill was used to plant 1€
range. demonstration small plots on the Ron Pigue

farm in Greene County.

Fertility & Pest Control:

A custom application of preplant fertilizer (0-0-60) went out May 2nd. On June 4th, 100# of 21-0-0-24 was
applied. On June 16", preflood N included 260 # of urea (120 units N). A final boot application included 70 # of
urea (32 units) and 30 # of potash. A total of 173 units of N and 78 units of K was applied to the field & small
plots.

For weed control, Command (16 0z) was applied at planting. On May 31* 1 gallon of RiceBeaux, plus | qt.
Propanil, plus %4 oz. of Permit was applied as an overlapping residual. Overall, weed control was good. We did see
some small escape patches of weedy rice and barnyardgrass.

No significant insect or disease problems were seen. No fungicide or insecticide applications were made.

Results:

At this ARPT site, the average yield of all entries was 168 bushels per acre (bpa). A couple of the highest yielding
hybrids, RiceTec 7401 (204 bpa) , and RiceTec 753 (203 bpa), were followed not too far behind by the top
performing pure line entries, DGLO37 (195 bpa), and Ozark ( a 2022 UADA release — 190 bpa). Looking at the
medium grain entries, Taurus (a 2022 UADA release — 168 bpa) performed very well compared to Titan (149 bpa).
Review the tables that follow for more planting, yield & milling results, for all entries in this trial and at other
locations.***

=== New Page ===

Summary of Arkansas Rice Performance Trial Locations, 2022

a a

on of Ag

Site

Planting Date

Emergence Date

Harvest Date

Soil Type

Location Type

RREC, Arkansas Co., Stuttgart, Ark.
PTRS, St. Francis Co., Colt, Ark.
NEREC, Mississippi Co., Keiser, Ark.
NERREC, Poinsett Co., Harrisburg, Ark.
CLAY, Clay Co., McDougal, Ark.
DESHA, Desha Co., McGehee, Ark.

LAW, Lawrence Co., Walnut Ridge, Ark.

| JAC, Jackson, Co., Newport, Ark.
| GRE, Greene Co., Paragould, Ark.
LON, Lonoke Co., England, Ark.

March 29
May 9
May 18
April 28
April 28
May 20
May 10
May 11
May 11
May 11

April 1f
May 15
May 25
May 6
May 11
May 28
May 18
May 28

September 7
September 27
October 13
September 23
September 14
September 28
September 21
September 29
September 21
September 12

Dewitt silt loam
Calhoun-Henry silt loam
Sharkey silty clay
Henry-Calloway silt loam
Crowley silt loam
Rilla silt, Portland clay
Foley-Calhoun silt loam
Amagon/Forestdale silt loam
Jackport silty clay loam
Portland silty clay

Research Station
Research Station
Research Station
Research Station
On-Farm
On-Farm
On-Farm
On-Farm
On-Farm
On-Farm

21

=== New Page ===

2022 Grain Yield Summary — All Locations

e of Arka a e D on of Ag e
Cultivar Grain CLAY* DESHA | NEREC | PTRS* | RREC | NERREC | LAw* | JAC GRE LON Mean
Length! bu/ac bu/ac bu/ac bu/ac bu/ac bu/ac bu/ac bu/ac bu/ac bu/ac bu/ac

Diamond
Ozark
Leland
DG263L
DGL2065
DGL037
Avant

Addi Jo
ProGold1
ProGold2
CLHA02
CLLI16
CLLI17
CLLI8
CLL19
PVLO03
RTv7231MA
RT 7331 MA
RT 7321 FP
RT 7421 FP
RT 7521 FP
RT 7401
RT XP753
RT 7302
RT XP780
Jupiter
Titan
Taurus
CLM04
DGMO004

L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
M
M
M
M
M

' Grain Length: L=long grain, M=medium grain. *PTRS harvested at low moisture, CLAY and LAW weedy locations.

=== New Page ===

2022 Milling Yield Summar

— All Locations

e of Arka a e D on of Ag
Cultivar Grain CLAY* DESHA [| NEREC [ PTRS* | RREC | NERREC | LAW* | JAC GRE LON Mean
Length’ | HR-TR2 HR-TR HR-TR HR-TR HR-TR HR-TR HR-TR HR-TR HR-TR HR-TR HR-TR

Diamond
Ozark
Leland
DG263L
DGL2065
DGL037
Avant

Addi Jo
ProGold1
ProGold2
CLHA02
CLLI16
CLLI17
CLLI8
CLL19
PVLO03
RTv7231MA
RT 7331 MA
RT 7321 FP
RT 7421 FP
RT 7521 FP
RT 7401
RT XP753
RT 7302
RT XP780
Jupiter
Titan
Taurus
CLM04
DGMO004

Pree rere ere eee ee eee eee

ce

SEEERKt

' Grain Length: L=long grain, M=medium grain; 7 HR-TR = % Head Rice (whole kernel) and % Total Rice (total milled rice). *PTRS harvested at low moisture, CLAY and LAW weedy locations.

23

=== New Page ===

UA

DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE Arkansas is
RESEARCH & EXTENSION

University of Arkansas Sytem Our Campus

2022 Late Season Soybean Potassium Demonstration

Investigator: Dr. Trent Roberts Extension Agent: Dave Freeze

Producers: Eason Farm (Carlos, Shane) Consultant: Mike Simmons
Location: Walcott, AR Soil Series: Forestdale silty clay loam
Background:

Research shows when soil test K (potassium) becomes deficient, soybean yields will decline. In addition,
potassium fertilizer currently makes up a good percentage (5-10%) of a soybean farmer’s budget.

UADA (University of Arkansas System, Division of Agriculture) faculty have recently developed tools which
help fine tune K nutrient management for soybean production. Along with routine soil sampling regularly used
to determine soybean nutrient needs, University officials have recently released the Potash Rate Calculator
(PRC) computer program to help a farmer/consultant adjust potassium (K20) fertilizer needed at planting,
based upon being the most profitable rate.

Procedures for collecting and analyzing soybean plant tissue samples late in the growing season to check for K
deficiency have also been established by UADA researchers. They have also developed a computer program
which helps predict whether tissue sample K levels are adequate to meet the crop’s needs, or if corrective late
season potash is needed. The program is called the Soybean Tissue K Monitoring Tool.

Objectives:

Evaluate the use of the UADA PRC to help the
soybean farmer/consultant adjust his early season K
fertilizer rate to a profitable level.

Document yield response to the application of late
season K fertilizer based upon the UADA dynamic
critical K threshold provided by the Soybean Tissue K
Monitoring Tool and plant leaf tissue sampling.

Determine if collecting plant tissue samples,
submitting them to the diagnostic lab, and receiving
results and recommendations, can work as a routine
practice for the farmer and his consultant.

2

An aerial application of potassium fertilizer was applied
in late August to test plots.

Project Setup:

The demonstration field was selected from one of the

fields in the 2022 K Management Project (10 fields total) in Greene County. The farmer and consultant were
interested in serving as cooperators for the demonstration to learn more about the program and its potential
benefit to their operation.

24

=== New Page ===

UA

DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE Arkansas is
RESEARCH & EXTENSION

University of Arkansas Sytem Our Campus

Mike Simmons, the farmer’s consultant, had recently
taken soil samples on the demonstration field. The PRC
was then used to determine an early season K fertilizer
rate expected to be profitable. An average soil test K
level was keyed into the PRC program along with other
input data provided by the farmer (expected yield level,
expected crop price, current K fertilizer price). A PRC
report was then generated to help refine the units of
K20 (K fertilizer) needed at planting to maximize
producer profit.

The next step was to collect plant leaf tissue samples
later in the season, soon after the soybeans reached
flowering (R1). The tissue samples where then
submitted to the UADA diagnostic lab (Fayetteville,
AR) for analysis.

Soybean leaves are collected to submit for nutrient
analysis.

The first tissue sample was targeted for a week or so after the field reached R1, and a second sample was
collected 14 days later. The second sample was collected to help monitor plant K levels, and to confirm
whether late season corrective K fertilizer was recommended. A late 3"! sample was collected 2 weeks after the
application of late season potash was applied, to check for differences in tissue K concentrations for the
different fertilizer treatments.

Soon after the field reached R1, the consultant and Extension Agent used bicycle flags to mark off three
different late season K fertilizer treatments for the field. They included 0, 100 (60 units K2O), and 200 (120
units K2O) pounds of potash.

On August 26" the treatments were applied by air. The plane was flying a 100 pound rate of potash per acre.
The center plot did not receive an airplane pass. The plots on each side of the center plot (adjacent to), each
received a single pass (60 units K2O) of fertilizer. The plots outside of those, to the far east and west sides of
field, each received 2 airplane passes (120 units K20).

The farmers combine yield monitor was used to determine yield for the different treatments at harvest. The
yield monitor had recently been calibrated. Yield was determined for one single combine pass down the center
of each treatment plot.

Soil Test Results:

Soil test results show the average soil test K level for the demo field at 85 parts per million (ppm). This falls
into the UADA low category, with a recommendation for 120 units (K2O) of K fertilizer per acre.

Potash Rate Calculator (PRC) Results:

According to our printout from the PRC program (used to get a profitable K fertilizer), 81 units of K20 were
recommended at planting. This was almost 40 fewer units of K2O than was called for by the UADA standard
recommendation.

Information provided by the farmer for the PFC program included an estimated yield of 60 bushels per acre,
price for potash of $900/ton, and crop price of $14.80/bushel.

25

=== New Page ===

UA

DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE Arkansas is
RESEARCH & EXTENSION
University of Arkansas Sytem Our Campus

Plant Tissue Results & K Monitoring Tool:

The field reached first flower (R1) on July 30". The leaf
tissue K level for the first sample collected for the project
field on August 9" (soybeans at full bloom with 9 nodes)
was 1.46% K. According to the Soybean Tissue K
Monitoring Tool, plant tissue level was below the 95%
dynamic critical K concentration threshold, and corrective
late season potash was recommended to avoid yield loss.

Ease Farn

Kield: Corr?
Rwesk- roe

Tissue sample | landed at 87% on the chart line for critical
K concentration. Based on the farmers expectation of 60 / ef | i ,
bushel per acre yield, about 8 bushels of yield might be The leaf tissue samples are carefully bagged and
saved if late season K fertilizer was applied before 44 days labelled before being sent to the UADA lab for
after R1. The fertilizer should help alleviate hidden hunger nutrient analysis.

and recover lost yield potential.

The second tissue sample (soybeans at beginning seed) was taken on August 23", just before late season demo
treatments were applied. Leaf K concentration was still low at this point, at 1.57% K. A bit of improvement
was seen for this sample (90% critical K concentration) according to the Tissue K Monitoring Tool. However,
as with the first tissue sample, corrective late season potash was recommended.

A third set of leaf tissues samples (one from each treatment section of the field) was taken 2 weeks after our
potash fertilizer treatments were applied. The plot not receiving late season potash had a tissue K level of
1.36% K. Tissue results for the sections of the field receiving 60 and 120 units of late season K20, each had a
plant tissue level of 1.49% K.

From these results it is evident that the plots receiving late season potash were able to take it up and move it to
the developing leaves and pods. The plots receiving the late season potash showed almost 10% more tissue K
than the plot not receiving the late season potash application.

Yield Results:

The field was harvested on October 21* with the farmer’s John
Deere combine. Averaged across the three treatments, the
demonstration field made 68 bushels per acre.

The plot on the far west side of the field was not included, due to a
thin stand and more drainage problems in this part of the field.
Also, the yield reported for the 60 units of K2O treatment is the
average for the plots on each side of the center plot (no fertilizer).

Yield results for the different treatments. ‘Acombine harvests the late season potassium

Units of K20 Bu/A demonstration soybeans.
0 68.2
60 68.4
120 67.3

26

=== New Page ===

UA

DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE Arkansas is
RESEARCH & EXTENSION

University of Arkansas Sytem Our Campus

Discussion & Summary:

At planting time, the farmer applied 80 units K20 as suggested by his PRC report. The field was planted on
June 10". Tt required a replant on June 21% due to heavy rainfall and waterlogged soil soon after the first
planting.

Reviewing plant tissue results, with both the first and second sample testing below the dynamic critical K
concentration level, the farmer used good judgement in making a late season corrective potash application to
preserve yield loss from K deficiency. In addition, the tissue samples taken from each plot 2 weeks after late
season K had been applied, showed higher levels of plant K available on the plots that received late potash.

It was surprising that all three treatments in the test made similar yields in the 67-68 bushel per acre range,
which was a great yield for such a late planting. One thought is that the 80 unit K2O application made on the
field at planting may have supplied enough K to meet the needs for the soybeans for the rest of season.

According to Dr. Trent Roberts, UADA Soil Scientist, if soybeans experience drought between emergence and
R1, then leaf tissue samples can come back with artificially low K levels since good soil moisture is needed for
K uptake. If any delays in irrigation occurred at this site during the hot/dry period seen from late June to early

August, it might have resulted in lower leaf tissue K levels.

With all plant tissue samples coming in low, one may also speculate that available soil K was still extremely
low and production of future crops will be reduced unless attention is given to following a K fertilizer
management program to help build soil test K levels from a low to a medium range.

Leaf tissue sampling soybeans was not too
taxing or confusing. A consultant should be
able to collect 15-25 newly developed, fully
expanded, trifoliate leaves (without the petiole)
to represent the field, as he makes his pest
scouting circle in a field. The leaves are small
and can readily be put in a pocket while
scouting. They also dry out quickly on the
truck dash in a paper bag.

They are also not too bulky to package and
mail to the diagnostic lab. The time frame
from sample submission until receiving
UADA lab results generally was 7 - 10 days.
A private lab may be an option to speed up a
client/consultant getting sample results.***

27

=== New Page ===

POTASH RATE

Profit-Maximizing K Rate Calculator for Irrigated Soybeans PRC )\.

as developed by Dr. M. Popp, Dr. N. Slaton, and Dr. T. Roberts CALCULATORS
What is your expected soybean price? 14.80 $/bu Metric
What do you expect to pay for muriate of potash fertilizer? 900 $/ton 0.75 $/Ib of K20
What is the yield potential of your field? 60 bu/acre
What is your soil-test K value (STK) and range? 85 ppm Soil test range +/- 26
What is your cost to apply fertilizer (equipment, labor, fuel or custom)? 7.50 $/acre ..your rate in lbs of K2O/acre: 100
Profit change comparing applying at 81.1Ib K,O/acre to no fertilizer: 29.27 S/acre Profit-max rate over your rate: $2.01

Estimated Yield Response to K Fertilizer and Profit-Maximizing Application Rates for a Range of
Initial Soil-Test K Values (STK) at Specified Yield Potential

3641.0
/

—~—-—-Est. Yield (STK = 111)

—Est. Yield (STK = 85)

s
| eas oie Ae) o@ 106330 wes tees Est. Yield (STK = 59)
45 {
° Obs. Yields (59 < STK < 111)

40 q
© Profit-maximizing rate +/- 95% C.l.

sO ING

Soybean Grain Yield (bu/acre)

35 4

30 T T T T T T T

0 25 50 75 100 125 150 175 VA

DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE

Fertilizer-K Application Rate (Ibs K2O/acre) RESEARCH & EXTENSION

University of Arka

Disclaimer: This software is provided ‘as is’ and without warranties as to performance or merchantability. Further, statements may have been made to you about this software, and they do not constitute warranties and shall not
be relied upon by the user to use the program or act on its results. This program is provided without any expressed or implied warranties whatsoever. Because the diversity of conditions and hardware under which this program
may be used, no warranty of merchantability or warranty of fitness for a particular purpose is offered. The user is advised to test the program thoroughly before relying on it. The user assumes the entire risk of using the program.
The authors will not be liable for any claim or damage brought against the user by any third party, nor will the authors be liable for any consequential, indirect, or special damages suffered by the user as a result of the software.
Results pertain to silt loam soils common in major rice producing regions of the humid mid-Southern U.S.

28

=== New Page ===

% Leaf K

Soybean Tissue K Monitoring Tool

Grower Name Field Name| Cupp 3-Late K yes
Variety Name Extend Flex Maturity Group V

County Greene State AR

Planting Date Ri (Flowering) Date

Sample Sample Date Leaf % K
(Enter data) (Enter data)

OoOANODURPWN PR

ray
(=)

Trifoliolate Leaf Sufficiency
@ Field Data 95% Sufficiency 85% Sufficiency = =75% Sufficiency

0) 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80
Days After R1 Stage

29

=== New Page ===

% Leaf K

Soybean Tissue K Monitoring Tool

Grower Name Field Name] Cupp 3-Late K No
Variety Name Extend Flex Maturity Group V

County Greene State AR

Planting Date Ri (Flowering) Date

Sample Sample Date Leaf % K
(Enter data) (Enter data)

OoOANODURPWN PR

ray
(=)

Trifoliolate Leaf Sufficiency
@ Field Data 95% Sufficiency 85% Sufficiency = =75% Sufficiency

0) 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80
Days After R1 Stage

30

=== New Page ===

DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE
Off RESEARCH & EXTENSION
University of Arkansas System

This soybean tissue K monitoring tool was designed to help

easily diagnose in-season K deficiencies with trifoliolate leaf

lab results. Only trifolioliate leaf (not including petioles)

from the uppermost fully expanded leaf should be compared

to the critical concentrations shown. i %

Instructions:

1. Enter planting date (required)

2. Enter date of R1 or first flower (required)
Use SoyStage to estimate R1 date if unknown: ETS ETS SME InST)

. Enter date each sample was taken (required)

. Enter leaflet K concentration from lab analysis (required)

. Green dot will appear on the figure
. Symbols below the red line are K deficient

Ann fw

Understanding Your Results:

The graph shows the dynamic critical potassium (K) concentration thresholds for
reproductive soybean. Critical concentrations determine the nutrient status at which below
is considered deficient and yield limiting, and above which is considered sufficient. The three
lines indicate the critical concentration for relative grain yield goals of 95% (red), 85% (blue),
and 75% (black). Any point below the red 95% relative grain yield goal critical
concentration is deficient and yield limiting. The 85% and 75% grain yield lines are shown to
help the user understand the potential yield loss if left unmanaged. If a field is deficient, an
in-season corrective application of granular K fertilizer can correct the deficiency and prevent
yield loss when applied correctly.

Fertilizer Timing:

The granular K fertilizer must be applied and incorporated with irrigation or rainfall within 20
days after R1 (A) in severely deficient situations and within 44 days after R1 (B) for hidden
hunger to prevent yield loss. After this point, yield loss is anticipated and a corrective
application can only minimize the loss, not prevent it.

Fertilizer Rate:
60-120 Ibs K,O per acre depending on the severity of the situation. Ongoing research intends
to improve this rate and calibrate it to the leaf K concentration.

31

=== New Page ===

UA

DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE Arkansas is
RESEARCH & EXTENSION

University of Arkansas Sytem Our Campus

2022 Poultry Litter Study — Greene County — Year 2

Investigator: Dr. Mike Daniels, Jace Clark, Clint Mangrum, Eric Simon, Lance Blythe
Producer: Distretti Farm (Johnny, Nathan, Ryan) Consultant: Mike Simmons
Location: Walcott, AR Soil Series: | See Table 1
Background:

In the last decade the poultry
industry has quickly expanded
into Northeast Arkansas (NEA).
Several farmers in this region
contract to grow broilers for
Peco and Ozark Mountain
Poultry each year. Expansion in
poultry production in NEA
continues to grow each year.

Poultry litter (PL), one of the
main byproducts in broiler
production, has quickly become
popular for row crop producers
and ranchers in this region.
They commonly use it on their
crop and hay fields, and
pastures.

A key reason for strong PL demand is due to the nutrient value cost. At the current prices for PL in NEA, the
cost per unit of NPK is comparable to, and sometimes even better than, what farmers are paying for an
equivalent amount of nutrients from commercial fertilizer.

We know from studying poultry litter use trends in other regions of the country, like Northwest Arkansas
(NWA), that nutrient runoff from using poultry litter as a soil amendment must be monitored to avoid
detrimental environmental impacts. Protection of ground and surface waters from excess nutrient (nitrates &
phosphates) runoff is paramount to maintain a safe water supply for agricultural, industrial, municipal, and
domestic use.

Terrain and agriculture are also a lot different in NEA (flat, row crops) compared to NWA (rolling hills, hay &
livestock). The average acre in NEA will need higher levels of N, P, K to achieve top row crop yields
compared to nutrient levels needed for haying and grazing in NWA.

In addition, many of the nutrients taken up by row crops in NEA leave the field with the grain, whereas much of
the hay and pasture consumed by livestock in NWA is cycled back into the soil.

In NWA, with a terrain that has lots of slope compared to the generally flat terrain of NEA, it is easier for
excess nutrients from poultry litter and commercial fertilizer to run off into the streams and reservoirs.

32

=== New Page ===

UA

DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE Arkansas is
RESEARCH & EXTENSION
University of Arkansas Sytem Our Campus
Objective:

To study environmental & production impacts of using poultry litter as a soil amendment to supply nutrients for
row crop production in Northeast Arkansas. Evaluate yield impact, and change to net returns, when poultry
litter is substituted for commercial fertilizer.

Demo Setup:

The project will be conducted for three years (2021-2023). Nearby fields with similar soil type, crop rotation,
and management, will receive different rates of poultry litter annually. Litter rates studied will be 1.0, 1.5,2.0,
and 2.5 tons per acre (TPA).

Over the course of the study, each field will be monitored for changes in organic matter (OM), nutrient levels,
and crop yields.

Grid soil samples (1 per acre) will be taken each spring with an automated sampling machine, to determine OM
and nutrient levels. The samples will be analyzed at the UADA diagnostic lab.

Samples of each lot of poultry litter used on project fields will be collected each year. They will be sent to the
UADA diagnostic lab for nutrient analysis.

Crop yields for each field will be determined using farmer records for each year of the study. Combine yield
monitor data, or grain elevator scale weights, may be used to determine bushels per acre (BPA).

Planting & Production Practices:

The four fields at the Distretti Farm study
site are near each other and generally
follow a corn-soybean crop rotation.

Cover crops (mostly wheat & crimson
clover) have been used on the project fields
in the last few years, including 2022. The
main soil series varies by field, but they all
have a silt loam soil texture.

In 2022, the Brown32 and Potter fields
were planted no-till to XF soybeans in
mid-June, following harvest of the wheat
cover crops. The West and Massey fields
were planted notill to RR2YLL corn in
mid-April. This was the second year for
the project fields to receive litter
applications.

33

=== New Page ===

UA

DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE Arkansas is
RESEARCH & EXTENSION

Univers of Arkansas System Our Campus

Soil Test Results:

Grid soil samples were taken in March/April. Lab results (median levels) for OM were similar (1.7-2.4 %) for
all four fields.

Soil test P levels were optimum-above optimum for all 4 fields (range from 40-72 PPM (parts per million per
acre)). Phosphorus fertilizer was not recommended for any of the project fields (corn or soybeans) at this site.

Soil test K levels were low-medium for all 4 fields (range from 83-115 PPM). For the corn fields, 80 units of K
fertilizer was recommended for the Potter field, and 115 units for the Brown32 field. For the soybean fields, 75
units of K fertilizer was recommended for the West and Massey fields.

Poultry Litter Results:

Composite litter samples were collected in late
March/April from litter piles being stored for each of the
project fields. The litter was custom broadcasted in early
April. It did not get incorporated since the producer was
using a no-till system.

The Brown32 and Potter soybean fields received 1.0, and
2.0 tons of litter per acre (TPA), respectively. Litter
analysis for these two fields came back at 49-59-71 (N-
P205-K20), and 37-52-73 per ton, respectively.

The West and Massey corn fields received 1.5, and 2.5
TPA litter, respectively. Litter analysis for these two
fields came back at 30-60-48, and 48-58-67 per ton,
respectively.

The litter samples for the West and Potter fields had low lab results for N (30-37#/ton). Meanwhile, analysis
results for N for the other two fields fell in the 50#/ton range. These N levels were a little lower than what we
see for most samples that are sent to the lab from the Greene County Extension office (55-55-60 average for N-
P205-K20 from 2019-21).

P20S5 levels for litter samples this year were all in the 58-60 #/ton range, except for the Potter field (52 #/ton).
K20 litter levels were above average (67-73 #/ton) for all fields expect the West field (48 #/ton) which fell a bit
lower than average.

Commercial Fertilizer Used:

Variable rate application was used to put out commercial K fertilizer on two of the four project fields before
planting.

None of the fields receive commercial P fertilizer. Looking at K fertilizer applied, only two fields received
potash (35 units K2O for Potter, and 30 units for West).

Split applications (at planting, side-dress, and pre-tassel) were used to supply corn with N fertilizer. Both the
West and Massey fields received a season total of 250 units of N from commercial fertilizer.

34

=== New Page ===

UA

DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE Arkansas is
RESEARCH & EXTENSION

University of Arkansas Sytem Our Campus

Yield Results & Nutrient Removal:

Yields were determined using yield monitor data for each field.

Checking corn yields, surprisingly, the West field which received a 1.5 TPA litter rate made 190 bushels per
acre (BPA), while the Potter field with 2.5 TPA litter cut 160.

A similar yield difference was seen on the 2 soybean fields this year. The Brown32 field which received a 1.0
TPA litter rate made 59 bushels per acre (BPA), while the Potter field with 2.0 TPA litter cut 52.

Nutrient removal from the field in the form of the grain harvested, was calculated using grain content estimates
in UADA Fact Sheet (FSA2176), Estimating Nutrient Removal for Row Crops Grown in Arkansas.

Grain in a 180 BPA corn crop removes an estimated 121, 63, and 45 pounds of N-P205-K20 per acre. Oilseed
in a 55 BPA soybean crop removes an estimated 182, 40, and 66 pounds of N-P205-K20 per acre.

Nutrient Balance Chart

In Table 1. Nutrient Balance Chart (NBC), we have attempted to show the amount of nutrients put into the soil
bank each year (litter & fertilizer), the amount of nutrients leaving the soil bank with grain harvest, and the net
balance at the end of the year. This should help us determine whether we are raising or lowering the soil test
level for a nutrient, depending on whether there was a net positive or negative balance for that nutrient for the
year.

At the Distretti Farm site, the NBC shows for P205, we ended up with a net gain (range of 16-89 #/A) for all 4
fields at the end of year. Enough P was supplied to meet the needs to grow the crop, and extra was available to
help build the soil P level.

University Soil Scientists estimate (note there can be a wide range) it takes 15 pounds of net P2OS at the end of
the crop season to build up | PPM soil test P. The extra P205 on the Distretti fields should help slightly build
the soil test P (a range of 1-6 PPM for the 4 fields).

Looking at K2O, the NBC shows we
also had a net increase for this nutrient
(ranging from 35-128 #/A) at the end
of year. We would expect soil K
levels to see some building.
University Soil Scientists estimate
(note there can be a wide range) it
takes eight pounds of net K20 at the
end of the crop season to build up 1

¥ PPM soil test K. Soil test K building
for the four fields ranged from 4-16
= PPM.

35

=== New Page ===

UA

DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE Arka nsas i Ss
RESEARCH & EXTENSION
Univers of Arkansas System Our Campus
Discussion:

The Distretti Farm test site saw good corn yields and soybean yields for the second year of our study. Adequate
nutrient (N-P-K) levels are a key factor for these top yields.

The farmer was able to meet the P and K nutrient needs of his corn and soybean crops, and potentially build soil
test P and K levels by applying poultry litter on all 4 project fields, and commercial K20 fertilizer on just two
fields. None of the four project fields received commercial P2OS fertilizer this year.

From an environmental standpoint, one should pay close attention when using higher rates of P & K (litter plus
commercial fertilizer). The higher rates could be beneficial to build soil test nutrient levels, but they could
also lead to excess nutrient runoff from the field.

Soil sample results showed all four fields testing optimum-above optimum (high) for P205 and low-medium for
K20. Therefore, P2OS fertilizer was not recommended at this test site. No yield response would be expected
from P fertilizer, so we would want to eliminate this production expense and potential environmental risk. On
the other hand, applying K20 fertilizer was recommended for the project fields (Brown32, West) receiving the
lowest litter rates, to help build the soil K from a low-medium level toward our goal of an optimum level.

Considering the use of poultry litter, from an economic standpoint, using litter to supply some of the crop’s P
and K needs is likely a good move compared to using all commercial fertilizer. Both litter and commercial
fertilizer work fine to provide a crops P and K needs, so using the source that costs the least (per combined
nutrient value) makes good sense.

Checking with local retailers in April
2022, the cost per unit of N, P205,
and K20 for commercial fertilizer
(includes custom application) was
estimated to be $1.08, $1.06, and
$0.72, respectively. At that same
time, an estimated average (factoring
in a wide range) cost of poultry litter
(including delivery to the farm and
custom application) was in the $55
per ton ballpark.

Using the above figures, and
considering the litter used at the
Distretti test site had a ballpark 41-
57-65/ton analysis, we can pencil out
that the nutrient value (just P & K) of
this litter was worth around $107 per
ton.

36

=== New Page ===

UA

DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE
RESEARCH & EXTENSION

University of Arkansas System

University soil scientists suggest we can estimate 30-50% of the N in poultry litter to be available for a corn
crop. The rest of the N can be lost via natural processes (leaching, volatilization, de-nitrification). If we use
this estimate, to put a value on the N in this litter to our corn crop, it comes out to $17 per ton. The combined
N-P-K nutrient value in this litter was in the $124 per ton range for corn production. Once again this was just
an estimate for 2022.

Do note that most poultry litter samples that go to the lab for analysis through the Greene County Extension
office come back in the 55-55-60 ballpark (there is a wide range). At these nutrient levels, the litter nutrient
value ($125/ton) for corn was well above the $55 litter ballpark cost the spring of 2022.

Another positive attribute to using poultry litter is its organic nature lending to slow release and the potential to
add some organic matter and tilth to the soil. It has for many years been recommended to help build back
precision leveled fields.

Summary:

This project has helped show it is very important to get an analysis of the poultry litter you plan to use on your
farm to know what level of nutrients it may supply. This will allow you to estimate the current economic value
of your litter source compared to commercial fertilizer.

Poultry litter can be used to substitute for some of the commercial fertilizer (P and K sources) used to grow row
crops in Northeast Arkansas. In addition, one needs to be cautious on the amount of N they will get from using
litter. With natural loss mechanisms for N, when using poultry litter in the spring, expect only 25-30% of the N
to be available for a rice crop, and 30-50% to be available for upland crops (corn, cotton).

A Nutrient Balance Chart may be a good way to gauge if you are putting out way too much or too little of a
particular nutrient. The chart could help a farmer make a better economic decision on how much combined
fertilizer and litter to use for the season. The chart could also provide insight if way too much of a particular
nutrient (N or P) is being applied for the season and potentially at risk for runoff which could lead to
environmental concerns years down the road.

The project fields at this sight have high enough levels of soil test P that P2O5 fertilizer is not needed.
However, for K, soil test levels are low-medium, and additional K20 fertilizer could help build soil K back up
to an optimum level. One should also be careful not to use too much potash which might lead to salt problems
in rice rotation or chloride toxicity for soybean production.

Evaluating crop (corn & soybeans) yields, it is uncertain why production was some 15% lower on the fields
receiving the higher litter rates. We need to watch this more closely in year #3 of the project.

37

=== New Page ===

U of A System, Division of AG, Cooperative Extension Service
2022 Poultry Litter Study - Greene County - Distretti Farm

Table 1: Nutrient Balance Chart

Soil Sample Results (SSR) - Field Median
Primary soil series
N #/A (Nitrate)

(Corn 200 bpat -N #/A

(Corn 200 bpat -P205 #/A

Corn 200 bpat -K20 #/A
-P205 #/A
-K20 #/A

Poultry Litter (PL) Applied (tons/acre)
Litter analysis - UADA lab - N-P205-K20/ton
N # applied/A

P205 # applied/A

K20 # applied/A

Commercial Fertilizer (CF) Applied

N # applied/A

P205 # applied/A - Field Ave variable rate
K20 # applied/A - Field Ave variable rate

Total Nutrients Applied (PL + CF)
*N Total #s

P205 Total #s/A

K20 Total #s/A

Crop & herbicide trait group
Yield Bu./A

N # Grain removal

P205 # Grain removal

K20 # Grain removal

Calloway SL Calhoun SL
46 52
59 92
2.0 1.7
9 8
7.3 7.0

49-59-71 30-60-48

Corn - RR2Y-LL
190
127

Hilleman SL
54
2.4

8
6.1

37-52-73

104

Soybeans - XF
52
172

VA

DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE
ENSION

Oaklimeter SL

32

92

1.7
7

48-58-67
120
145

Corn - RR2Y-LL
160
107

P PPM T 2 4 6
kK PPM 4 7 10 16

*Seasonal loss of N from leaching, deniti

** Nutriet removal detemined using values listed in UADA Fact Sheet (FSA2176)
***Net gain/loss from soil amentments is much less than one expects due to nutrient dynamics (buffering, tie up) in the soil
****U ADA soil test guide suggests estimating 15#s of P205 fertilizer to build one PPM soil test P, and 8#s K20
fertilizer to build one PPM soil test K. These estimates come after subtracting grain nutrient removal first.

ication, and volatilization, is highly variable, depending on crop, soil, weather, etc.

=== New Page ===

SIV AWE

ARKANSAS STATE
UNIVERSITY

Producer:

Project Team:

Location:

Objective:

Demo Setup:

ae ON RC S DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE LA
ARS RESEARCH & EXTENSION XTENSION

2022 Soil Health Project - Greene County — Year 3

Smith Farm (Clay, Terry, & friends) Investigators: Dr. Steve Green

Greene County NRCS — Adam Eades, Katie Womack & colleagues
Arkansas State University — Dr. Steve Green & colleagues
USDA-Agricultural Research Service - Dr. Joe Massey & colleagues
Greene County Conservation District — Will Young & board

Greene County Extension Office — Dave Freeze & colleagues

Crop Consultant — Austin Miller

Several others —- ASU, USDA-ARS & UA Scientists

Walcott Soil Series: Calhoun silt loam

Evaluate the impact of including
cover crops & notill — minimum
till, in cash crop production (row
rice-soybean rotation) to improve
yields, economic returns, irrigation
efficiency, water quality, and soil
health.

The project was conducted for 3
years (2020-2022). Side by side
fields (row rice or soybeans) with
similar soil types, crop rotation,
and management (a field can also
be split in half) were compared.
One field (or half field) received conventional management (no cover crop) for the three-
year period. The other field (half field) was managed to produce both a yearly cover crop
and cash crop using a no-till or minimum till approach.

Cover Crop —Planting & Development:

The 2021 soybean crop was harvested October 19th from the
project field. The 2022 cover crop was planted on the western

: half of the field in early November. Cover crop seed was drilled.

| The fall cover crop mix included wheat & crimson clover. An

; excellent cover crop stand emerged soon after planting. Cover
crop stand counts were taken on February 11th. The project field
averaged 8 plants per square foot for wheat, and 1 for clover. In
addition, clover was thin on much of the field, but some spots had
a decent stand. Wheat provided a solid cover for the whole field.

=== New Page ===

USDA O NRC som A,

ARKANSAS STATE RESEARCH & EXTENSION
UNIVERSITY ARS

University of Arkansas System

The eastern half of the project field was not planted to a cover crop and served as our conventional check.

The cover crop was terminated in late March with a burndown application of glyphosate. Cover crop
biomass was small at this time resulting in good control. We did not see any cover crop pests of concern, but
a few patches of ryegrass (likely glyphosate resistant) were seen following the burndown application.

Cash Crop — Planting & Development:

RiceTec 7321 rice (22 # seed/acre) was drilled notill in April on both the cover and no cover sides of the
project field. Both sides came up to a nice uniform stand. Stand counts on June 15" showed the no cover
side of the field (3.4 plants per square foot) with a little better stand (cover side average was 2.9 plants/ft2).

Regarding fertilizer, the farmer used 65 units of K (112 # potash) and 148 units N (321 # urea) for the
season. The urea was split, with all applied before the first flush except 100 pounds put out near boot stage.
No phosphorus fertilizer was used on the field

Cash Crop - Pest Management:

Weed control in the rice cash crop was
good. It is expected that overlapping
residual herbicide applications were used,
most likely starting out with Command
and following later with Preface.

Regarding insects and diseases, only a
light level of stinkbugs was found, but
never developed to treatment level.
Neither the cover nor check sides of the
field received an insecticide application.
The producer did put out a fungicide
application (Quilt XL at 17 0z/Acre).

40

=== New Page ===

SIV AE USDA VA

* — | DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE
ARKANSAS STATE RESEARCH & EXTENSION
UNIVERSITY ARS sity of Arkansas Syste

Cash Crop — Yield

The rice was harvested in September. The check side of the field made a little better yield compared to the
cover side. Based upon information provided by the farmer, the check side cut a little over 4 bushels more
per acre compared to the side which had the cover crop.

Water Use & Dynamics - Pending

Furrow irrigation was applied with polypipe. Each irrigation set used a mechanical flowmeter to measure the
quantity of water applied. Computerized Hole Selection (pipe planner) was run to design the two sets (one
set per treatment).

The moisture sensor was installed and checked regularly but that they didn’t give us reliable data to present
or compare treatments.

We tracked total rainfall during the cover crop growing period and the cash crop growing period.

We utilized local precipitation data for the cover crop growing period and an infield rain gauge with weekly
readings during the cash crop growing season.

Total Cash Crop Period
Rainfall: April 1 —
September 30 = 23.45 in.

Note: effective rainfall is
less than we’ve represented
since we used the time
interval of planting to
harvest.

For future comparisons it
may be best to document
rainfall between significant
crop growth stages;
especially R6.5 when
irrigation in Soybeans is to
be terminated.

41

=== New Page ===

SIV AE USDA VA
anuansas Stare —_ Ly Se

UNIVERSITY of Arkan

Soil Health Dynamics- Pendin

Soil health encompasses soil physical, chemical, and biological properties. To improve soil health, 4 main
practices are needed:

e Minimize soil disturbance (no-till)

e Keep living roots in the ground for as long as possible (cover crops)

e Keep the soil covered (cover crops and preserving residue)

e Plant diversity (crop rotation and cover crop diversity)
Many measurements and soil samples were taken in year | and will be again in year 3 that will be used to try
to measure change in soil health from the implementation of the 4 soil health practices above.
The soil measurements and samples taken to track changes in soil properties over the life of the
demonstration include:

bulk density (the weight of soil in a known volume)

aggregate stability (how well the soil holds together and resists erosion)

infiltration rates (how fast water soaks into the ground)

routine soil testing at the University of Arkansas Soil Lab (chemical properties)

Haney soil health test (biological indicators)

N-star soil test (biological and chemical indicators) which can possibly be used as an Arkansas soil
health test.

e Nematode soil samples (biological indicators) in spring and fall

Differences in soil measurements and samples are not expected to be seen until soil health practices have
been implemented over a number of years. For example, Arkansas research has shown that on some delta
soils, it takes implementing soil health practices for 5 years or more to see significant changes in aggregate
stability, while bulk density and water infiltration rates can see improvements in less time. Final soil samples
and measurements were collected this fall. Samples are being analyzed in the lab now. When the final results
come in, we will share results comparing the two sample times.

With exception to the routine soil testing for fertilizer management decisions and the nematode samples, the
samples and measurements we are taking aren’t necessarily for immediate management decisions. We are
just tracking the on-farm benefits that can be had from soil health practices like bed integrity, greater
rainwater utilization and irrigation efficiency, reduced weed pressure and others. The benefits from soil
health should make the farm more profitable through increased efficiency.

Additional Analysis - Pending

ASU and ARS are partnering on this project to do additional analysis on irrigation efficiency and water
quality. They are documenting irrigation water applied and monitoring quantity and quality of water leaving
the fields. Their data can be viewed in a separate report when available.

At the time of this report USDA-ARS Researcher, Dr. Joseph Massey, reported the following for the 2022
Irrigation Season:

e Irrigation applied to the side with a Cover Crop: 21.2 inches
e Irrigation applied to the side without a Cover Crop: 19.5 inches

42

=== New Page ===

GUA USDA vad A

of Arkansas Systen

Summary - Pending

Yield did turn out a little better on the no cover side of the field. The stand was a little better on this side.

We did not have any trouble with insects moving from the terminated cover crop to the newly established
cash crop. No insect or disease problems developed, making this a cheap crop to grow, pest management
wise.

Economic Results - Pending

Using U of A Extension Interactive budgets, economic reports will soon be generated for both the Cover
project field and No Cover field. These reports will be available soon.

43

=== New Page ===

UA

DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE
RESEARCH & EXTENSION
University of Arkansas System
Soil Health for Grazing Lands
Partnering: Larry & Linda Morris

Project Team: Dr. Mike Daniels, Dr. John Jennings, Kenny Simon, Adam Eades, Lance Blythe
Partners/Sponsors: Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)

Objective: Implement a multi-year on-farm research-based program to demonstrate production practices
that would help the producer meet production goals and to collect soil data.

Producer Goals: To improve forage diversity, quantity, and quality; increase rotational grazing capability and
grazing efficiency; improve soil fertility and health; reduce winter hay feeding, and any other
information available to help improve the operation.

Farm Background:
The soils are a Calhoun Silt Loam from 0-3 percent slope. Soil was poorly to somewhat-poorly drained.

Approximately half of the farm’s acreage was previously used for row crops. The other portion had been used
for grazing and haying for many years.

Project Timeline & Practices (Year 1):

Beginning in January of 2020, a questionnaire was sent to producers
followed by several meetings with Extension and NRCS staff to gauge
current production practices, to discuss producers short and long-term
goals, and to gauge their willingness to cooperate on a multi-year project producers & project team members
with the proposed project timeline. meet to discuss project plans.

February 2020: A farm survey was taken to note current production practices, to view current facilities and
equipment available, to test hay and soil quality, to note available pasture forages and hay stores, and to survey
forage pest pressure. Recommendations were made to control pests and locations were determined for annual
forages to be planted.

March 2020: We looked at potential paddock design, electric
fencing, water tanks, heavy-use areas, and other potential
management practices to be implemented. Fertilizer, lime, and
herbicide recommendations were made as well.

April 2020: The following data was gathered on cow/calf herd:
cattle weights, hip height, body condition score, foot score, docility Water tank & electric fence design
score, and hair shedding score. established.

May 2020: The no-till planter was calibrated. Herbicide was applied and bermudagrass was no-till drilled in a
25-acre field to establish an improved summer perennial forage.

University of Arkansas, United States Department of Agriculture and County Governments Cooperating

The University of Arkansas System Division of Agriculture offers all its Extension and Research programs and services without regard to race, color, sex, gender identity, sexual orientation,
national origin, religion, age, disability, marital or veteran status, genetic information, or any other legally protected status, and is an Affirmative Action/Equal Opportunity Employer.

44

=== New Page ===

UA

DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE
RESEARCH & EXTENSION
University of Arkansas System

June 2020: Excellent stand of Cheyenne II bermudagrass was established in
the 25-acre field. Forage pest surveyed and recommendations made.

July 2020: PTO sprayer was calibrated and broadleaf herbicide was applied
to the 25-acre field to suppress broadleaf weeds.
ate

Established seedling
bermudagrass stand.

August 2020: Poultry litter was applied to 25 acres in preparation for
stockpiling. Burndown herbicide was applied to a 15-acre paddock to control
weeds in preparation to plant a summer annual (pear! millet) to improve
available forage quality. Paddock was to be utilized in combination with 25-acre field of stockpiled
bermudagrass to improve forage quality and extend grazing into Fall.

September 2020: A mixer of left-over summer annual, annual ryegrass, and brassicas
were planted into an 8-acre paddock. Annual ryegrass was planted into another 10-acre
paddock. One ton of poultry litter per acre was applied to approximately 75 acres of the
farm.

October 2020: Forage samples of the pearl millet were taken to assess forage quality.
Results were 18.4% crude protein (CP) and 62.9% total digestible nutrients (TDN).
Recommendations were made to limit grazing of the pearl millet to two days per week
in combination with the stockpiled bermudagrass to improve and extend fall grazing.
Balansa Clover was planted into five acres of the bermudagrass field at 16 pounds per
acre (double rate) and skipping every other row.

Forage height was
measured.

Winter 2020/2021: Hay feeding was reduced from 166 days to 106 days. Hay was normally fed Nov. | through
mid-April. Stockpiled forages extended grazing through December 1. Fall planted winter annuals and legumes
allowed the producer to stop feeding hay 30 days earlier in the spring of 2021.

Additional savings were established with the use of hay rings. Prior to the use of hay rings, bale grazing was
normal practice- which resulted in a good amount of hay being wasted. The utilization of hay rings reduced
overall hay usage by approximately 50%. The hay rings cost $300 each and paid for themselves within the first
week of use. Previous feeding rates were two bales per day and now feeds one bale per day due to lower waste
and higher animal consumption.

Estimated savings in hay feeding over a 106-day feeding season vs.
166 days were $5300. Additional savings from using annual forages
and stockpiled forages to extend the grazing season by 60 days were
$3000 for a net savings of $6550 by using improved forage
management practices. In addition, he has been growing forage for
more of the year to improve overall forage productivity and soil
health.

Bale grazing cattle in the field resulted in
hay being wasted.
University of Arkansas, United States Department of Agriculture and County Governments Cooperating

The University of Arkansas System Division of Agriculture offers all its Extension and Research programs and services without regard to race, color, sex, gender identity, sexual orientation,
national origin, religion, age, disability, marital or veteran status, genetic information, or any other legally protected status, and is an Affirmative Action/Equal Opportunity Employer.

45

=== New Page ===

UA

DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE
RESEARCH & EXTENSION

University of Arkansas System

Project Timeline & Practices (Year 2):

March/April 2021: Hay feeding ceased in March. Cool season annuals and legumes were grazed. An additional
hay field was acquired on an adjoining farm and soil samples were taken. This field would be fenced for grazing
and utilized for hay production, as needed. A burndown herbicide application was made to this field. Forage and
grazing management plans were made for each paddock for 2021.

Soil samples were taken on the whole farm. Soil testing results were compared with previous year samples and
by hay feeding locations. Across the whole farm, soil test phosphorus decreased slightly while potassium levels
increased slightly. Field 5 had the highest increase in p & k levels likely due to the release of nutrients from the
hay fed (bale grazing) in that location the previous winter. Additional samples were pulled in hay feeding areas
(Field 2) which revealed almost twice the level of p & k.

April 2021 May 2020 Difference
P K % organic P K % organic % organic
Field Acres pH (Ibs/a) (Ibs/a) matter pH (Ibs/a) (Ibs/a) matter pH __P (Ibs/a) K (Ibs/a) matter
1 25 6 28 116 2.2 6 30 111 21 0 -2 5 0.1
2 15 5.6 32 136 2.5 5.4 26 82 2.3 0.2 6 54 0.2
3 10 5.5 16 82 2.1 5.5 22 84 2.2 0 -6 -2 -0.1
4 18 5.4 22 96 1.9 5.2 24 114 2 0.2 -2 18 -0.1
5 10 6 62 204 2.5 6.1 40 120 N/A -0.1 22 84 N/A
6 3 6.1 42 156 45 6 42 130 N/A 0.1 0 26 N/A
7 13 6.1 40 208 3.7 5.9 80 236 3.4 0.2 -40 -28 0.3
8 10 6 56 168 2.2 6 58 190 3.2 0 -2 -22 -1
9 4 6.2 26 116 3.6 6.4 32 112 3.2 -0.2 -6 4 0.4
10 10 6.1 24 114 3.3 6 18 94 2.6 0.1 6 20 0.7
11 20 5.6 36 106 2.7 6 46 118 2.7 -0.4 -10 -12 i?)
12 20 6.5 14 100 3.5 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A
Average 6.0 30 149 3.1 5.9 38 126 2.6 0.1 8 22 0.5
Hay rings 65 64 248 27

May 2021: Winter kill was noted in a newly established bermudagrass
field. Fertilizer applications were made to warm season pastures.

Burndown herbicide applications were made to a field in preparation for!
summer annual planting. One of the pastures, containing endophyte
infected fescue and a high rate of winter broadleaf weeds, was treated
with metsulfuron to control weeds and suppress fescue. Every other
pass was skipped to help identify how well the product worked as a
growth suppressant on the fescue.

July 2021: Current hay stores and hay needs for winter were assessed.
Forage pests were being monitored closely. Bermudagrass field was

ae Me Fes¢ ression observed between —
harvested for hay. Field will be grazed in preparation for stockpiling. seen ce eee een eset oeween

treated (left) & untreated (right) areas.

University of Arkansas, United States Department of Agriculture and County Governments Cooperating

The University of Arkansas System Division of Agriculture offers all its Extension and Research programs and services without regard to race, color, sex, gender identity, sexual orientation,
national origin, religion, age, disability, marital or veteran status, genetic information, or any other legally protected status, and is an Affirmative Action/Equal Opportunity Employer.

46

=== New Page ===

UA

DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE
RESEARCH & EXTENSION
University of Arkansas System

August/September 2021: Fertilizer was applied to warm-season perennial pastures to be stockpiled. Plans were
made on winter hay feeding locations to help improve soil fertility. Pastures to be planted were grazed through,
then burndown herbicide applied in late August. These pastures were all planted around early to mid-September
with one or a combination of spring oats, winter oats, ryegrass, and brassicas. Plans were made for a field day in
late October.

October 2021: Field Day plans were finalized. Pastures stockpiled and planted were surveyed. Fall/winter
grazing plan was made for cow herd and growing calves. Great turnout for field day.

Audience gathered to learn from UADA Forage Specialist, Dr. John Jennings, during the October 2021 Livestock &
Forage Field Day

November/December 2021: Stockpiled forages were utilized. Winter-annual pasture rotation plan made.

Partnership with USDA- Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS):

Larry and Linda were working with the local NRCS office during the same time they were planning with
Extension. Planning was done jointly with the Morris’s to set up an Environmental Quality Incentives Program
(EQIP) contract to accomplish many of the practices needed to establish the structural components (fence, water
system, heavy use areas for erosion, tree planting for shade, and a stream crossing) and the needed forages
(Fescue/Clover, Bermudagrass, Switchgrass plantings). Extension works closely with NRCS; however, this
was truly a great partnering opportunity to combine Extension’s grazing technical expertise along with NRCS’s
technical and financial resources. EQIP contracts are multi-year contracts that provide cost-share to do
approved conservation practices. It is a competitive program that is based off an environmental ranking.

Demonstration Results & Summary:

The University of Arkansas Cooperative Extension Service and Natural Resource Conservation Service were
able to help the cooperator meet their goals of improving forage diversity, quantity, and quality; increasing
rotational grazing capability and grazing efficiency; improving soil fertility (slightly), drainage, and health; and
reducing winter hay feeding by implementing research-based practices.

University of Arkansas, United States Department of Agriculture and County Governments Cooperating

The University of Arkansas System Division of Agriculture offers all its Extension and Research programs and services without regard to race, color, sex, gender identity, sexual orientation,
national origin, religion, age, disability, marital or veteran status, genetic information, or any other legally protected status, and is an Affirmative Action/Equal Opportunity Employer.

47

=== New Page ===

DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE

RESEARCH & EXTENSION
University of Arkansas System

Demonstration Results & Summary (continued):

a oe

View of 25-acre field at the beginning of View of 25-acre field at the end of the
the project. project.

The producers continue to implement recommended forage management practices to improve productivity and
to extend the grazing season. Practices included soil sampling, proper fertilization, use of poultry litter, planter
calibration, planting improved forage varieties, improved grazing management practices and pasture design,
pasture drainage improvement, improved footing in high-use areas (reducing potential foot problems), forage
pest control, sprayer calibration, and increased access to water to better utilize available forage. They used a
combination of stockpiled bermudagrass, winter annuals, and legumes along with controlled grazing to extend
the grazing season. The producer continues to strategically feed hay in a manner to improve soil fertility. The
producer continues to grow more forage for more of the year which continues to improve overall forage
productivity and soil health. Larry and Linda Morris were a pleasure to work with and we hope they have found
this program to be of value to them and others.

Illustrated Timeline:

7/2020- Producer applied herbicide.

2/2020- Producer pulled hay core samples for hay
quality testing.

University of Arkansas, United States Department of Agriculture and County Governments Cooperating

The University of Arkansas System Division of Agriculture offers all its Extension and Research programs and services without regard to race, color, sex, gender identity, sexual orientation,
national origin, religion, age, disability, marital or veteran status, genetic information, or any other legally protected status, and is an Affirmative Action/Equal Opportunity Employer.

48

=== New Page ===

UA

DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE
RESEARCH & EXTENSION
University of Arkansas System

Illustrated Timeline (continued):

y ta
11/2020- Project team & producers work to build tire
water tanks.

3/2021 Balansa Clover 6/2021- Balansa Clover
stand. allowed to go to seed.

from seed & spread.

University of Arkansas, United States Department of Agriculture and County Governments Cooperating

The University of Arkansas System Division of Agriculture offers all its Extension and Research programs and services without regard to race, color, sex, gender identity, sexual orientation,
national origin, religion, age, disability, marital or veteran status, genetic information, or any other legally protected status, and is an Affirmative Action/Equal Opportunity Employer.

49

=== New Page ===

UA

DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE
RESEARCH & EXTENSION

University of Arkansas System

2022 Hay Show & Contest

Cooperators: Greene County Hay Producers
Investigators: Dr. Shane Gadberry, Lance Blythe

Partners/Sponsors: Greene County Fair Board, GreenPoint Ag, Legacy Equipment, UADA Agriculture
Diagnostic Lab

Objective: Provide an opportunity for producers to learn the quality of
their hay, understand what factors influence that quality, and to set hay
quality production goals based on animal nutrient requirements.

Testing Method: Hay samples were taken during the first week of
August using a Star Quality brand push-type forage sampler. Twenty-
five to thirty sample cores were pulled from each lot of hay entered.
Samples were bagged, labeled, then sent to the Agriculture Diagnostic
Lab in Fayetteville. Only warm season grass hay was accepted for the
contest.

Hay sampler in round hay bale to take
core sample for hay quality testing.

Ranking Method & Results: Samples results were ranked using a composite calculation utilizing crude
protein (CP) percent and total digestible nutrients (TDN) percent. The total composite score was weighted at
30% for CP and 70% for TDN. See table below for results.

# CP% ADF% = NDF% = TDN% 220226
21003 16 32.9 66.1 61.5 GREENE CO!

21011 11.6 30.4 61.3 61 HAY SHOW & CONTEST

21009 12.3 31.5 62.2 60.7

21006 13.6 33.7 62.2 59.9

21004 12.8 33.6 62.5 59.6

21012 9.6 30.3 60.1 60.1

21008 12.7 34.2 62.6 59.2

21005 11 32.6 64 59.4

21007 8.3 29.9 57.2 59.8

21001 10.2 33 64.6 58.8

21000 9.1 32.9 61.8 58.3

20999 10.1 36.4 63.7 56.7

21014 8.9 33.9 60.4 57.7 Thank you to our 2022 Greene County Hay
21002 77 32 58.5 58.2 Show & Contest Sponsors!

21010 9 36.3 60.5 56.3 Legacy Equlpment/Sobn Dest Ron Bellomy, Location
21013 78 34.8 65.3 56.6 GreenPoint AG- Scott Watson, Store Manager

ELEGAcY LiAtsescres: ng EXTENSION

=== New Page ===

UA

DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE Arkansas is
RESEARCH & EXTENSION
University of Arkansas Sytem Our Campus

Results & Discussion: There was a relatively wide variation
in test results. Crude Protein ranged from 7.8% - 16% and
TDN from 56.6% — 61.5%. The variation in nutrient content of
these samples was influenced by several factors such as
drought, conditions at harvest, forage pests, etc. However, no
factor influences the nutrient quality of hay more than stage of
plant maturity at harvest.

All samples submitted were above the 5-year state average for
percent TDN and twelve of the sixteen were above for percent
CP. All samples with TDN over 60% would meet the TDN
requirements for an 1,100-pound cow with 18-pound peak milk
production at any stage of production throughout the year. With this hay, no supplemental energy should be
needed to maintain cow body condition. All samples over 11.5% CP would meet crude protein requirements
as well. Simply put, most of the hay entered in this contest would require little to no supplemental feeding

for cattle!

If you would like to see how your hay would meet cattle, sheep/goats, or horse requirements, check out this
link: https://forageadvisor.uada.edu

To learn more about how your hay would meet the nutritional needs of cattle in other production stages,
check out this publication: https://www.uaex.uada.edu/publications/pdf/MP39 | .pdf

Educational Component: During the Greene
County Fair, the top three contest winners were

announced, and test results were posted at an

educational display. Attendees of the Greene
County Fair could try to visually pick the best
quality bale of hay.

We were pleased to see that the contest stimulated
much conversation about hay production and hay
quality. Most producers seemed pleased with
their results considering all the production
challenges they faced this year.

Congratulations to this year’s winners and a
special thanks to the sponsors! The sponsors
made this contest possible at no cost to producers
and some nice prizes were awarded as well!

51

=== New Page ===

UA

DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE
RESEARCH & EXTENSION

University of Arkansas System

Systemic Insecticide Demonstration- Carpenter worm Control

Cooperators: Danny Dodd

Investigators: | Dr. Gus Lorenz, Dr. Glenn Studebaker, Andy Vangilder, Lance Blythe

Objective: To assist homeowners with identification and control of pest in Ash trees.
Pests: Carpenterworm, Prionoxystus robiniae

Demonstration Background:
In the May of 2021, the Greene County Extension Office received a call about some young Ash trees that

appeared sick and the owner had noticed holes in the bark. Upon further investigation, we found the holes to
look similar to the Emerald Ash Borer (EAB). We shared some pictures and communicated with a couple of
forestry specialists, and due to the diameter of the holes, they didn’t think it was EAB. Arkansas Forestry
Commission technicians met with the cooperative extension agent and homeowner for further investigation.
While cutting a limb to take to their lab, a boring insect was found in one of the limbs. The insect turned out
to be a carpenterworm. Extensive damage and tunneling was noted within the limb. Varying size larvae and
shed exoskeletons were found as well. The holes observed in the bark turned out to be exit holes.

Upon identification, we determined that there were systemic products available that should help control these
pests and possibly keep the damages to the trees from getting any worse. We proposed a demonstration that
would treat one tree and leave the other one untreated as a control. The homeowner, Mr. Dodd, was
interested in the proposed demonstration. We contacted Mr. Andy Vangilder and Dr. Gus Lorenz to find
products available to conduct the demonstration. Dr. Lorenz provided the needed product, which contained
the active ingedient imidacloprid.

Method:

The Ash tree located south of the house was used as the untreated control. The Ash tree north of the house
was treated. The imidacloprid was mixed with water at the labeled rate and applied around the base of the
tree in May of 2021. The same treatment protocol was used and another treatment was applied, March 29,
2022, during spring greenup.

Summary:
The Ash tree treated with imidacloprid survived another season due to the systemic insecticide treatment as

opposed to the untreated tree. The untreated tree did not. The treated tree will likely not have future new
growth from the limbs that were so severely damaged from the pests, but will likely overall put on new
growth with proper management.

This demonstration helped the homeowner see that early detection of the pest is important and that the use of
systemic products can help control boring pests if they are present.

To learn more about Carpenterworms, please visit: https://hortnews.extension iastate.edu/2021/04/be-aware-
carpenterworm

52

=== New Page ===

UA

DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE Arkansas is
RESEARCH & EXTENSION
Univesity of Arkansas Sytem Our Campus

Demonstration Results:
Treated:

"5/21/21 5/2/22 7/15/22

Untreated:

5/2/22 "7/15/22

5/21/21

53

=== New Page ===

UA

DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE
RESEARCH & EXTENSION

University of Arkansas System

Initial On-Site Pest Signs:

Shed exoskeletons of Carpenterworms left
by emerging adult moth

Arkansas is
Our Campus

ay

S
pra
CS g

in)

Young Carpenterworm larvae (caterpillar)

Boring and tunneling of the Carpenterworm

=== New Page ===

UA

DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE
RESEARCH & EXTENSION
University of Arkansas System

Cooperating:

Lead Agent:

Objective:

Arkansas is
Our Campus

Greene County 4-H Livestock Project Group

Greene County Fair Association, Greene County Community Fund, Greene County Farm
Bureau, Local, State and National Businesses, Financial Supporters, Livestock Producers,
and all 4-H Livestock Families

Blake Davis

Train youth in broiler and animal husbandry principles such as selection, nutrition, and
preparation for show, parasite control, and herd/flock management. Assist youth in
developing youth livestock projects tailored for competitive events in Arkansas and
Nationally. Promote development of youth communication, record keeping, budgeting,
and teamwork skills. Showmanship and sportsmanship are a major thrust of this
educational program.

Livestock Show Events:

Greene County Fair, NEA Livestock Show, Arkansas Youth Expo, Arkansas State Fair, Buffalo Island
Northeast District Jr. Livestock Show, Crowley’s Ridge Classic Jr. Livestock Show, North American
International Livestock Expo, National Western Stock Show, Mississippi Youth Expo, numerous jackpot shows
in Arkansas, and numerous national breed shows and events

Educational Trainings:

On farm visits with extensive one-on-one training, Statewide Livestock Show Clinics conducted in Greene
County every other year. (Sponsored by major feed companies)

Photos: Beckett R. and Jackson R. exhibited the Grand and Reserve Champion Meat Pen Fryer Rabbit at the

Arkansas State Fair.

=== New Page ===

UA

DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE Arkansas is

RESEARCH & EXTENSION

University of Arkansas System Our Campus

Youth Statistics:

We had over 30 4-H youth in Greene County that exhibited a total of 150 livestock projects throughout 2022.
Numerous youths participated in all available shows and livestock training events, but a few of the younger
Cloverbud members exhibited only at local shows.

Project Statistics:

4-H members exhibited numerous livestock entries in 2022. Projects included swine, goats, sheep, cattle,
broilers, and rabbits. Greene County 4-Her’s received numerous scholarships throughout the 2022 show season.
Many youths use these funds to finance other projects and to fund their college education. Scholarship programs
have become a new innovative way to reward the 4-H youth for their hard work. This was another outstanding
year for Greene County 4-Her’s!

Left: Elissa V. exhibited the Grand Champion Hampshire Market Hog at the Arkansas State Fair.
Right: Jackson R. exhibited the Reserve Champion Light Cross Market Hog at the Arkansas State Fair.

Greene County 4-H had a total of four youth members in the Arkansas State Fair Sale of Champions.
They brought home over $13,000 in premium money and scholarships.

Left: Jackson R., Beckett R., Elissa V., Millie F., and Karie H. were
inducted into the Arkansas State Fair ‘Purple Circle Club.”

Greene County 4-H had a total of five youth members that were inducted
into the “Purple Circle Club.” The “Purple Circle Club” is an awards
program recognizing junior livestock exhibitors who earned championship
honors at the Arkansas State Fair.

=== New Page ===

UA

DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE
RESEARCH & EXTENSION

University of Arkansas System

2022 Top Notch Intercollegiate Swine Judging Contest

Cooperating: Greene County Fair Association, Greene County 4-H Foundation, Greene County
Agriculture Instructors, Greene County 4-H Livestock Project Group members &
volunteers, and participating collegiate livestock judging teams

Lead Agent: Blake Davis
Objective: To provide an educational swine judging contest to promote growth in knowledge of the

livestock industry through livestock evaluation and enhance competitive judging skills-
including animal selection and reasoning skills. To provide the opportunity for youth 4-H
members to observe a collegiate-level swine judging contest and to promote development
of youth communication, decision-making, note taking, speaking, and teamwork skills.
To provide hands-on opportunity for youth 4-H members to conduct and manage a
judging contest with a large, diverse audience.

Educational Method:

=

The contest consisted of eight swine classes for the
collegiate teams to evaluate. Of those eight classes,
four classes of oral reasons were presented to
professionally qualified reasons takers in the
livestock industry. The youth 4-H members
observed the course and management of the contest.
The youth and 4-H volunteers were given show
management responsibilities to allow the 4-H
members to “learn by doing” in a controlled and
safe manner. Following the contest, both the

collegiate and youth 4-H members observed Greene County 4-H members drive hogs in the center of

livestock evaluation and reasoning by a professional the show ring as collegiate livestock judging teams
for each of the contest classes. surround the outside of the show ring.
Results:

Nine collegiate livestock judging teams representing six different states made for a total of 150 contestants
participating in this first-year event. The event took place at the Greene County Fairgrounds.

Greene County 4-H youth were provided with an astounding amount of hands-on learning in diverse areas of
focus. Through the course of management of the contest, responsibilities and tasks varied. Some of the
responsibilities and tasks led by 4-H members and volunteers included: management of registration, leading and
assisting contestants, driving and preparing (rinsing, watering, keeping animals cool) hogs to be judged,
coordinating classes to and from the show ring, announcing and timekeeping, preparing the reasons rooms,

57

=== New Page ===

UA

DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE Arkansas is
RESEARCH & EXTENSION
University of Arkansas Sytem Our Campus

keeping refreshment stations full, preparing boxed
meals, and preparing the scantrons for scoring.
These tasks varied in educational emphasis
including animal science, health/ food safety, and
communication.

Greene County 4-H members drive hogs out of the show
ring and prepare another class of hogs to enter from the
grooming chutes.

58

=== New Page ===

UA

DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE
RESEARCH & EXTENSION

University of Arkansas System

Leadership Paragould Agriculture Day

Event Coordinator(s): Paragould Regional Chamber of Commerce & City of Paragould

Project Team: Sue McGowan, Allison Hestand, Leadership Paragould Committee, Tony Lucius, &
UADA Extension Agents

Sponsors: Paragould School District, Legacy Equipment,
Unico Bank, Ridge Retreat & Adventure Center,
MFA Agri Services, Bayer Crop Sciences, &
Farm Credit Midsouth

Non-profit Partners: | Greene County Library, Pilots for Christ, &
Greene County Rescue Squad

Presenters: Adam Eades, Barkley Rowland, Bobb Knott, Brad Smithee, Brent Cox, Brian
Wooldridge, Bryan Privett, Bryce Anderson, Cary Clayton, Chris Harden, Clay
Smith, Cody Gray, Cruz Hill, Dave Freeze, David Pigue, Derek Boling, Devon
Bryant, Donis Hamilton, Harlee Haney, Jeremy Frankenberger, Jimmy Williams,
Joey Massey, Jonathan Mays, Justin Blackburn, Justin Burlison, Kelly Wright, Lance
Blythe, Lance Winn, Larry Baker, Matt Wright, MFA Ag Staff, Mike Williams,
Patrick Lenderman, Ron Bellomy, Ronnie Hill, Steven Hill, Terry Gray, Terry Smith,
Tiffany Hinson, Tony Lucius, & Walker McMilan

Program Goal & Background:

The goal of the Leadership Paragould program is to “help
develop leaders for tomorrow.” The program helps members
grow personally and professionally and gives them the tools and
the challenge to “go forth and lead.” This program covers
numerous community topics presented by community leaders
and non-profit organizations.

The Agriculture & Transportation session is one of the subject
areas covered in the annual Leadership Paragould program. The
objective of the Ag Day program is to share the local, regional,
state, and national value and diversity of Greene County
agriculture with members of the Leadership Paragould class.

The Greene County Cooperative Extension Service has had the opportunity to assist with this program since
2013. Each year in June, class members gather early and hear a presentation from UADA Cooperative
Extension Agents about the economic impact that agriculture has on the economy. This is normally followed
by a presentation from one of the many non-profit organizations in Greene County.

59

=== New Page ===

UA

DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE
RESEARCH & EXTENSION
University of Arkansas System

Agriculture business and farm tours take up most of the day.
The goal is to provide agriculture education directly from local
agriculture producers and experts. These agriculture tour
locations change slightly from year-to-year to help showcase
the agriculture diversity in Greene County.

The day normally concludes with an “agriculture panel
discussion.” The panel is comprised of a diverse group of
agriculture producers and industry professionals. The
discussions are facilitated by UADA agents. The discussion is
open with no agenda. The goal is for class members to ask
anything they wish and get learn straight from the agriculture
professionals. The discussion is always interesting, funny,
educational and a little “heated” at times. There are always
myths dispelled during the discussions. All-in-all it provides
class members, committee members, and agricultural
professionals with an opportunity to get to know one another
and see how we can all work together for a better community.

=== New Page ===

VA 2022 Greene County

DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE

resrarcn& extension EXtension Soil Trends

University of Arkansas System

7,678 soil samples were
submitted to the UofA Soils Lab
for analysis from Greene County
during the 2022 program year*

Total of 44,296 acres were
represented by samples

*as of October 1, 2021- September 30, 2022

Most common crop recommendations
requested for Greene County samples:
¢ Row Crops (Soybeans, Rice, Corn)
¢ Forages (Hay & Pasture)

¢ Vegetable Garden
¢ Lawn (Bermudagrass)
¢ Food Plots

=== New Page ===

Your
Greene County vA

RESEARCH & EXTENSION

C OO le era tive Exte Nsio al S e rvic e University of Arkansas System

www.udex.uada.edu/counties/greene

Annual Undate

2022 Greene County Extension Education Outreach
e =Total Educational Contacts: 754,081
e Total County Volunteer Hours: 1 405 Hours
e Value of Volunteer Efforts: $42,079.75

Greene County 4-H Program
Overview of Programs
e 247 4-H Members
e 46 4-H Volunteers
e 16 4-H Clubs/ Project Groups
e Total Educational Contacts: 12,728
Key Programs & Activities Conducted:
County Events:
e Hosted county Giant Pumpkin & Watermelon Contest, Livestock Judging Workshop, 4-H
“Harvest” Party, Fall Farm Mudder, Christmas Community Service Activity, Poultry BBQ
Contest, Get Real- Here’s the Deal Youth Financial Literacy Activity, Dairy Recipe
Contest, 4-H Coloring Contest, Citizenship Community Service Project at Memorial
Gardens, Youth Teaching Garden Educational Sessions, 4-H Craft Night, Fair Entry Prep
Night, & 4-H O’Rama Competitions
e Conducted a Intercollegiate Swine Judging Contest- 150 collegiate contestants from nine
different colleges representing six different states competed. Over 40 4-H youth and
volunteers were involved in planning, hosting, serving, and conducting the event.

Virtual Activities:
e Hosted virtual Ross Photography Contest (2,698 people reached)

Leadership & Achievements:
e 2 youth named Arkansas 4-H Teen Stars
e 6 youth received district-level record book awards
e 1 youth received state-level record book award

Community Economic Development
Key Programs & Activities Conducted
e Assisted with & conducted community beautification projects, Paragould Farmers Market,
Paragould Community Garden, Chamber Board, Leadership Paragould Program
e Partnered to establish Paragould as a “Tree City USA” community

=== New Page ===

Your DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE

UA tessscrenmessios & EXTENSION
University of Arkansas System

Agriculture & Natural Resources

Overview of Program
e Educational Contacts: 743,828 e 35 Master Gardener Members
e 2,053 Farm/Site Visits e 10 Master Gardeners
e 13 Demonstrations Beautification Projects

Key Programs & Activities Conducted

Rice:
Arkansas Rice Performance Trial (Cultivar Test)
Potassium management program - 8 fields
IPM survey & scout reporting - 5 fields
Barnyard herbicide resistance screening - 4 fields

Soybean:
Soybean Research Verification Program
Soil Health team project (NRCS & GCCD & others cooperating)
Potassium management program - 10 fields
Last season potassium demonstration
IPM Survey & scout reporting (disease & insect) - 5 fields
Corn earworm moth trapping program — 6 sites checked weekly (June- August)
Grow for the Green Soybean Yield Challenge

Hybrid Trial
Poultry litter rate study

Potassium management program — 3 fields
Southwestern Corn Borer Moth Trapping — 4 sites checked weekly (June- July)
Wheat:

e Wheat Research Verification Program
Horticulture:
Fall Garden Seminar
Brown Bag Lunch — 8 garden-education sessions
Monthly Master Gardener Newsletter
Plant, Nurture, Grow- Zoom Drip Irrigation Presentation
Livestock & Forages:
e Monthly Livestock & Forage Newsletters/e-Updates
Weekly Forage IPM survey & scouting
Livestock & Forage Field Day
Bi-Annual Calfhood Vaccinations
Bi-Annual Breeding Soundness Exams
Multiple Weed Control Demonstrations
Small Ruminant Dewormer Study
Cow Herd Improvement Programs
Tick Collection Survey
Beef Quality Assurance Certification Programs
On-Farm Forage Nitrate Sampling

The University of Arkansas System Division of Agriculture offers all its Extension and Research programs and services without regard to race, color, sex, gender identity, sexual orientation,
national origin, religion, age, disability, marital or veteran status, genetic information, or any other legally protected status, and is an Affirmative Action/Equal Opportunity Employer.

=== New Page ===

UA

DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE
RESEARCH & EXTENSION

University of Arkansas System

Program Partners

We want to thank the many businesses & individuals who contributed to our 2022 Greene County
Extension Crop, Livestock, & Youth Demonstrations, Programs, & other Projects. Many are listed
below.

Farmers:

Britt & Justin Blackburn, Derek & Royce Boling, Ryan Boozer, Jason Boyd, Nathan Davis, Johnny
Distretti, Carlos & Shane Eason, Shawn & Brandon Finch, Nick Fox, Brad & Randy Gray, Chris Hardin,
Ronnie & Steven & Cruz Hill, Greg & Shannon & Larry & Gary King, Brandon Martin, Larry & Linda
Morris, Justin & Roy Newsom, Tyler & Raney Nutt, Clint Pigue, David Pigue, Ron Pigue, Jim Pillow,
Danny & Stacey Rice, Dallas & Rob & Ronnie & Ryan Roberts, Chris & Allen & Randy Russom, Clay &
Terry Smith

Consultants:
Sterling Clifton, Jack Cox, Brandon Davis, Dustin Engler, Shane Frost, Austin Miller, Chris Murray, Lance
Ramthun, Mike Simmons, Charles Wood, Justin Threlkeld, Luke Zitzelberger

Business Supporters:

4S & J Inc., AgriGold, Anheuser-Busch, Baker Implement Company Inc., BASF, C & H Insurance,
Delaplaine Seed Company, Final Drive Genetics, GreenPoint AG, Hog Air Aviation, Horizon AG LLC.,
Kin Co AG Aviation Inc., Lawrence County Seed Company, Legacy Equipment, MFA Agri Services,
Nutrien Ag Solutions, Riceland Foods, Inc., Scott Flying Services Inc., Simplot Grower Solutions, Steve
Cobb & Family, Vance Cupp & Sons, Inc.

Community Supporters:

City of Paragould, Greene County Cattlemen’s Association, Greene County Conservation District, Greene
County 4-H Foundation, Greene County Fair Association, Greene County Farm Bureau Board, Greene
County Quorum Court, Paragould City Council, Paragould Parks & Recreation, Paragould Regional
Chamber of Commerce, USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service

University Staff:

Scharidi Barber, Dr. John Boyd, Jerry Clemons, Dr. Mike Daniels, Dr. Jason Davis, Chris Elkins, Dr.
Travis Faske, Dr. Shane Gadberry, Blair Griffin, Dr. Jarrod Hardke, Dr. John Jennings, Dr. Jason Kelley,
Dr. Kelly Loftin, Dr. Gus Lorenz, Dr. Jason Norsworthy, Dr. Trent Roberts, Dr. Jeremy Ross, Kenny
Simon, Ples Spradley, Scott Stiles, Dr. Glenn Studebaker, Priscella Thomas-Scott, Andy Vangilder, Cheri
Villines

Individual Supporters:

Josh Agee, Langston Ashmore, Ron Bellomy, Justin Blackburn, Cory Burton, Brent Carpenter, Steve Cobb
& Family, Dr. Steve Copeland, Vance Cupp Jr., Adam Eades, Stan Foster, Cody Gray, Terry Gray, Vicki
Griggs, Aaron Harmon, Kristie Head, Allison Hestand, Colin Hester, Sherry & Jim Holland, Bill Jones,
James Kashak, Jordan Leatherman, Patrick Lenderman, Doug Manning, Kim Mayberry-Holifield, Daniel
Mayer, Jeremy McClelland, Rusty McMillon, Paula Norman, Blaine & Vicki Nunn, Bill Pollard, Adam
Rawls, Stephen Riggs, Casey Rogers, Jason Scatterfield, Randy Scott, Harvey Songer, Andy Swindle, Rich
Tate, Pauletta Tobey, Mindy Tritch, Caleb Wall, Scott Watson, Richard Yeazel

64

=== New Page ===

Contact us:

Greene County Extension Service
4410 Fairview Road (Mailing)
4312 Fairview Road (Physical)
Paragould, AR 72450

Phone: 870-236-6921

DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE)

We https://www.uaex.uada.edu/
pa a counties/greene

Find us on https://www.facebook.com/

Face book greenecoextension/

The University of Arkansas System Division of Agriculture offers all its Extension and Research
programs and services without regard to race, color, sex, gender identity, sexual orientation,
national origin, religion, age, disability, marital or veteran status, genetic information, or any

other legally protected status, and is an Affirmative Action/Equal Opportunity Employer.