# Document 122219

RESEARCH & EXTENSION

University of Arkansas System

Uy A DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE

Agriculture and Natural Resources

FSA7068

Africanized Honey Bees:
What You Should Know

John D. Hopkins
Associate Professor
and Extension
Entomologist - Urban

Glenn E. Studebaker
Associate Professor and
Extension Entomologist

Mark Stoll
Apiary Section Manager

Arkansas Is
Our Campus

Visit our web site at:
https://www.uaex.uada.edu

What You Need to Know
About Honey Bees

There are some new honey bees in
Arkansas that may be more easily
aroused to defend their “homes” than
bees we are used to. So you need to be
aware of what to do about them.

If | find honey bees feeding in my
yard, what should | do?

Honey bees live in large groups
(up to 60,000 bees). Single worker
bees can fly as far as six miles to col-
lect pollen and nectar from flowers to
feed themselves and their offspring.
Sometimes they visit hummingbird
feeders for sugar water. They also
collect water from birdbaths, swim-
ming pools or pet watering dishes.
Bees gathering food will sting only if
they are trapped in clothing, stepped
on or otherwise threatened. Single
foraging bees should be left alone.

What if | see a large number
of bees?

If you regularly see many bees,
you should be alert to the possibility
there may be a wild honey bee colony
nearby. Look for numerous bees flying
in and out of an opening such as a
crack in a wall, hole in the ground or
in the cover of a water valve box.

If you do find a swarm or an
established bee colony in your
neighborhood, keep everyone away
from the bees. Contact your local

Cooperative Extension Office or the
Arkansas State Plant Board directly
(501-225-1598) for instructions.

Do not try to remove colonies
yourself! NEVER shoot, throw rocks
at, pour gasoline on, burn, treat with
pesticides or otherwise threaten
established honey bee colonies.

Do not ignore bee colonies around
your home, even if they don’t seem to
be a problem. Small colonies that
have recently set up housekeeping
may be docile at first but can become
more defensive with age. You should
have wild honey bee swarms or
colonies removed immediately by a
trained professional.

What should you do if you
accidentally disturb a colony and
are attacked?

RUN away as fast as you can. Get
to the shelter of a house or car as
quickly as possible. Because the bees
target the head and eyes, try to cover
your head as much as you can, with-
out slowing your progress. Do not
flail or attempt to swat the bees, just
get away fast. Entering water is not
recommended. The bees may wait for
you to come up for air.

If you see someone being attacked
by bees, encourage them to run away
or seek shelter. Do not attempt to
rescue them yourself unless you have
a bee suit and proper training. Call
911 for emergency help.

Once you are away from the bees,
examine yourself for stingers. When a
honey bee stings, it leaves its stinger
and venom sac behind in the skin,
which kills the bee.

University of Arkansas, United States Department of Agriculture, and County Governments Cooperating

=== New Page ===

Do not compress the stinger by trying to pull it
out with tweezers or your fingers, as this will only
squeeze more venom into the wound. Scrape the
stingers out using your fingernail, the edge of a credit
card or with a dull knife. If you are feeling ill, if you
have any reason to believe you may be allergic to bee
stings or if you have been stung more than 15 times,
seek medical attention immediately.

Should all bees be killed?

NO. Beekeepers are being encouraged to maintain
their managed colonies because honey bees pollinate
many vegetables, fruits and nuts, as well as produce
honey. In fact, about one-third of our daily diet comes
from crops pollinated by honey bees.

carpenter bee bumble bee

Bees are robust, hairy insects. Besides honey
bees, some common bees in Arkansas are carpenter
bees and bumble bees. Female carpenter bees are
entirely black bees approximately one inch long. The
males are similar in size but are blonde-colored and
are seen less often. Carpenter bees visit flowers to
collect pollen and nectar in the same manner as
honey bees but do not live in large colonies. They
are not at all aggressive, but the females can sting
if provoked.

Bumble bees are also large bees but are more
brightly colored, with alternating bands of yellow and
black. Bumble bees often nest in the ground. They
live in groups but do not have as many workers as a
honey bee colony.

A \\

mud dauber wasp

paper wasp

Wasps are more slender than bees, with a
relatively thin waist. Their brightly colored “skin” is
smooth and somewhat shiny, often with sharply con-
trasting yellow-and-black patterns. Their hind legs
are narrow and cylindrical. All wasps have four
wings, and the females can sting many times. Wasps
are predators and feed on many different insects and
spiders as well as sweets.

Printed by University of Arkansas Cooperative Extension Service Printing Services.

Acknowledgment: The material in this fact sheet has been adapted with permission from the following
publication: Dave Langston, “Africanized Honey Bees in Arizona: Training Manual,” University of Arizona
Cooperative Extension Bulletin 195018, 1996.

DR. JOHN D. HOPKINS and DR. GLENN E. STUDEBAKER are
associate professors and Extension entomologists with the Department
of Entomology, University of Arkansas Division of Agriculture, in Little
Rock and the Northeast Research and Extension Center at Keiser,
respectively. MARK STOLL is apiary section manager with the Plant
Industry Division, Arkansas State Plant Board, Little Rock.
FSA7068-PD-6-12RV

Issued in furtherance of Cooperative Extension work, Acts of May 8 and
June 30, 1914, in cooperation with the U.S. Department of Agriculture,
Director, Cooperative Extension Service, University of Arkansas. The
Arkansas Cooperative Extension Service offers its programs to all eligi-
ble persons regardless of race, color, national origin, religion, gender, age,
disability, marital or veteran status, or any other legally protected status,
and is an Affirmative Action/Equal Opportunity Employer.