# Document 122367

RESEARCH & EXTENSION

University of Arkansas System

Uy A DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE

Sherrie Smith
Plant Pathologist/
Instructor

Arkansas Is
Our Campus

Visit our web site at:
http:/Awww.uaex.edu

Introduction

Tomatoes are grown by most home
gardeners in Arkansas and are com-
mercially produced primarily in the
southeastern and other parts of the
state. Tomatoes suffer from numerous
diseases and are regarded as among
the most sensitive plants to herbicide
drift injury.

Serious tomato diseases in
Arkansas are caused by viruses,
bacteria, fungi and nematodes. Plant
viruses are somewhat similar to
viruses that attack humans and
animals, in that they must use
infected host cells to reproduce and
cannot survive independently. Plant
viruses are too small to see with even
the most powerful light microscopes
but can be detected with antibody-
based or molecular tests using plant
material. These tests can be done by
our Plant Health Clinic on samples
sent in by the local county extension
agent. In some years, plant viruses
may be the most important diseases of
tomatoes in Arkansas, resulting in
near total loss for some growers.

Bacterial diseases are also
widespread in the state and are often
favored by the warm, wet spring or
early summer weather in Arkansas.
Bacteria are single-celled organisms
visible only by high-powered micro-
scopes and are among the most
common microorganisms on earth.
Most bacteria are beneficial, but a few
species can cause diseases in plants
or animals.

Fungi are very diverse micro-
organisms that can be seen with
either low-powered or high-powered
microscopes, depending on the species.

Agriculture and Natural Resources

FSA7568

Managing Tomato
Diseases in Arkansas

Pid

4

Although single-celled, most fungi
form filaments (hyphae) or other
structures composed of many cells.
Mushrooms are commonly observed
fungal structures, for example. Most
fungi are also considered beneficial,
but some species can cause disease,
primarily in plants.

Nematodes are microscopic
roundworms and live almost every-
where. Nematodes can be parasites of
both plants and animals; plant nema-
todes are generally associated with
the soil and roots of plants. Nematode
problems can be difficult to diagnose,
and suspect soil must be sent to the
Nematode Diagnostic Laboratory for
identification of a particular nema-
tode. Because of the difficulty involved
in analyzing soil samples, a small fee
is charged for this service.

The viruses, bacteria, fungi and
nematodes that attack tomatoes cannot
infect humans or animals — they have
adapted to live only on plants.

University of Arkansas, United States Department of Agriculture, and County Governments Cooperating

=== New Page ===

Virus Diseases
Cucumber Mosaic Virus (CMV)

This is a common virus disease of tomatoes in
Arkansas, still it only causes sporadic damage. It can
infect many plants besides tomato, including cucum-
bers, melons, lettuce, peppers, ornamentals, weeds,
etc., and is transmitted by more than 90 aphid species.

Symptoms — Early symptoms include yellowing,
stunting, mosaics (light and dark green pattern within
infected leaves) and bushiness. Only parts of the plant
may have symptoms, such as only the bottom or top
leaves. A later characteristic symptom is called shoe-
string, which can also be caused by tobacco mosaic
virus (Figure 1) or tomato mosaic virus, where infected
leaves become very narrow and string-like. This symp-
tom may also resemble some types of herbicide injury.
Severely CMV-infected plants produce little or no fruit.

Management —

1. Eliminate nearby weeds to reduce the amount
of virus for aphids to transmit.

2. Destroy infected plants immediately.

3. Insecticides and certain mineral oil sprays may
be effective in preventing virus transmission.
Resistant tomato varieties are not available.

Tobacco Mosaic/Tomato Mosaic Virus
(TMV/ToMV)

These are highly related viruses, but ToMV is
more commonly found on tomato whereas TMV is
more common on tobacco. However, they both can
infect tomatoes. Both viruses can survive with seeds
or plant debris and may survive multiple seasons in
infected debris in the soil. They are most often trans-
mitted by people who handle infected seed or plants
then touch uninfected plants.

Symptoms — The most
common symptom is a
mottling of infected leaves
(mottling or mosaic consists
of light and dark green
areas in the infected leaf),
and young infected plants
are also often stunted with
a yellowish cast. Infected
leaves may be small and
curl upward or otherwise
appear deformed. A shoe-
string symptom similar to
CMV may also be present
(Figure 1). High tempera-
tures reduce symptoms; cool temperatures increase
them. Infected green fruit may develop a brown color
inside (brownwall), usually on the first two clusters
and often before leaf symptoms are noticed.

Figure 1. Tobacco Mosaic
Virus in tomato leaves.
Note the “shoe-stringed”
narrowed leaves.

Management —

1. Use only uninfected transplants or seed.

2. Growers should never use any tobacco
products before handling tomato seed or
plants — or they should at least wash their

hands thoroughly with pumice soap and
water or non-fat milk to inactivate any virus
on their hands before touching plants.

3. Use resistant varieties, if available. Varieties
with more than one resistance gene are better.

4. Rotate tomatoes to different soil areas at least
every two years — continuous tomato cropping
on the same soil year after year is a bad idea
for many reasons, including these viruses.

Tomato Spotted Wilt Virus (TSWV)

This is the most serious virus disease of
Arkansas tomatoes in recent years, causing wide-
spread damage to both commercial and home garden
plantings. Infected fruit are unmarketable. The virus
is spread between plants by at least nine species of
thrips (a tiny winged insect). The virus infects more
than 1,000 plant species, including many weeds and
ornamentals, so it is usually present in most areas.
Weather patterns such as warm winters that favor
survival of thrips probably are responsible for severe
outbreaks of the disease.

Symptoms — Young
infected leaves usually turn
bronze with many dark,
irregular spots (Figure 2).
Tops of plants may suddenly
die back (snuff-top) and
some plants may wilt on one
side, suggesting a wilt
disease. Early-infected
plants produce little or no
fruit while later-infected
plants produce fruit that is
discolored. Infected green
fruit may have slightly
raised bumps with faint, ]
light green to whitish circles.
The circles and rings are
more obvious as the fruit
ripens, staying yellowish
while the fruit turns red
(Figure 3). These symptoms
are usually not noticed at
the breaker (picking) stage.
As the tomatoes ripen,
symptoms intensify.

Figure 2. Tomato Spotted Wilt
Virus (TSWV) in tomato
leaf. Note dark irregular spots.

Figure 3. Tomato Spotted Wilt
Virus (TSWV) in tomato fruit.
Note mottling and circles.

Management —

1. Plant varieties
resistant to TSWV.

2. For commercial tomatoes, controlling thrips
early in the season with systemic insecticides
may reduce TSWV incidence but may not be
effective in severe years. Spraying of vegeta-
tion and weeds around the tomato field or
garden is also recommended. Read and follow
all label directions for products.

3. Plant as early as possible.

4. Reflective mulch under tomatoes may reduce
infection by discouraging thrips feeding.

5. Pull and destroy infected plants immediately.

=== New Page ===

Bacterial Diseases

Bacterial Canker (Clavibacter
michiganensis ssp. michiganensis)

This is an infrequent problem but may be very
serious in some fields or gardens. The bacterium is
spread by seed, infected soil or crop debris, contami-
nated stakes, etc., and by splashing water, workers
or machinery. It may be favored by wounding,
especially on staked and tied tomatoes.

Symptoms — Margins of lower leaves start
turning brown and one side of the leaf may wilt.
Entire leaves and branches start to die. Yellowish
streaks may develop along stems and sunken,
brown spots (cankers) may develop. The inside of
infected stems turns yellow then brown, and the
pith may collapse. Yellow ooze may appear on the
cut ends of infected stem sections.

Management —

1. Use only clean seed and transplants.

2. Suspect seed should be treated with 1%
bleach for 10 minutes to disinfect.

8. Pruning tools and stakes should be
disinfected with 10% bleach, if the disease
is a routine concern.

4. Infected plants should be destroyed
immediately.

5. Rotate to soil that has been free of tomatoes
for two years and grow corn or beans in
infested soil for one to two years to
eliminate the bacterium in the soil.

Pith Necrosis (Pseudomonas sp.)

This disease is
sometimes confused with
bacterial canker and is an
occasional problem in
Arkansas. It is favored by
excessive nitrogen fertil-
ization, pruning or suck-
ering wounds and high
humidity.

Symptoms — Dark
streaks may be observed
on the stems, plants may
wilt and the pith hollows
out (Figure 4). Figure 4. Pith Necrosis of

Management — tomato stem.

1. Do not overfertilize.

2. Rotate but not with alfalfa, another host.

3. Avoid using contaminated pruning tools or
disinfect tools frequently in 1% bleach.

4. Remove suckers only when plants are young
so wounds heal quickly.

Bacterial Speck (Pseudomonas syringae
pv. tomato)

This disease is favored by cool, wet weather and
is more common during the spring months in

Arkansas. It is spread primarily on seed or infected
transplants and is moved about by splashing water,
workers or machinery. It can survive in infected
crop debris for several months and can live on
various weeds.

Symptoms — The
disease causes small, round,
dark spots on leaves
(Figure 5). Young spots do
not have a halo (light
border) but older spots can.
Spots may grow together,
killing larger areas of leaf
tissue. Spots can also form
on stems, branches and
fruit. Fruit spots are very
tiny dark specks and can
be slightly raised or
sunken, depending on the
age of the spot (Figure 6). A
dark green halo may
surround some fruit spots.

Figure 5. Bacterial Speck on
young tomato leaves.

Management —

1. Use only bacterial
speck-free seeds or
transplants.

2. Seed disinfestation with 1% bleach for
10 minutes should be used when the seed
source is suspect.

3. Eliminate all nearby weeds or volunteer
tomato plants.

4. Rotate tomatoes to new soil areas every two
years and plant rotation crops like corn or
beans in old production areas.

5. Bactericides containing copper can be used
but should be applied following label direc-
tions at the first sign of disease. These
materials will wash off periodically and must
be reapplied every one to two weeks.

Figure 6. Bacterial Speck on
tomato fruit.

Bacterial Spot (Xanthomonas campestris
pv. vesicatoria)

This disease is common in Arkansas and can be
severe under warm, wet conditions. It has usually
been more of a problem on fall-grown tomatoes in
home gardens. It is spread on infected seed and trans-
plants and may survive in diseased plant debris or on
volunteer tomatoes. It is moved about by splashing
water, people, machinery
or wind-driven rain.

Symptoms — Brown,
circular spots form on
leaves (Figure 7), stems
and branches and may
appear grayish (water-
soaked) around the edges
during rainy or dew
periods. Spots are usually
small, about '/s inch across.
Spots may combine as long
streaks under wet, warm

Figure 7. Bacterial Spot on
tomato leaves.

=== New Page ===

conditions, but no halo is
present around them.
Under severe conditions,
entire branches may turn
brown and die. Spots on the
fruit look like tiny, raised
blisters (Figure 8) which
grow to become a larger,
brown, scab-like spot with a
sunken center). Fruit
lesions may have a halo
that disappears in time.

Figure 8. Bacterial Spot on
tomato fruit.

Management —

1. Use disease-free seed or transplants.

2. Disinfect suspect seed with 1% bleach for
10 minutes.

3. Destroy volunteer tomatoes in the area.

4. Rotate to new soil areas every two years —
avoid continuous cropping.

5. Apply approved, labeled bactericides as
needed at the first sign of disease.

Bacterial Wilt (Ralstonia solanacearum)

This disease can cause rapid death of infected
plants but usually only attacks a few plants within a
planting. It can infect many other plants, including
potato, tobacco, eggplant and others. The bacterium
can survive in the soil for months, especially in well-
drained soils. It is spread by soil and water move-
ment or by diseased plants or infected debris.

Symptoms -— Early
symptoms are a slight
wilt of the youngest a
leaves, followed by a rapid |
wilt within two to three
days (Figure 9). New
aboveground roots may
appear just above the soil
surface growing out of
the stem. The inside of
the stem becomes brown
(Figure 10), and stems cut
cross-wise may 00ze a
thick, off-white to yellow-
ish liquid. Sticking the cut
end of an infected stem
partially into a glass of
water reveals a milky-
white stream of bacteria
in the water within three
to five minutes. The root
system may also develop a
brownish rot as the plant
dies. Symptom develop-
ment is favored by hot,
dry weather.

Figure 9. Bacterial Wilt of
tomato.

Management —

1. Use only disease-
free transplants
from a reliable
supplier.

tomato. Note general
browning of inside of
infected stem when split.

2. Rotate to clean areas as soon as possible. Do
not use peppers, eggplant, Irish potatoes,
sunflowers or cosmos in the rotation areas.

3. Grow resistant varieties, if available.

4. Rotation soils should be fallowed one to two
years between crops, with frequent tillage.

5. Remove infected plants and destroy
immediately.

6. Grow on raised beds to promote drainage.

Fungal Diseases

Buckeye Rot/Phytophthora Root Rot
(Phytophthora parasitica, P. capsici,
P. drechsleri)

This disease is favored by warm, wet conditions
and poorly drained soil. The fungi are common in
many soils.

Symptoms — Buckeye
rot occurs on the fruit and
first appears as a brown
spot on the skin, usually
where the fruit has con-
tacted soil. Green or ripe
fruit may become infected.
As the spot grows, it forms
rings of narrow dark brown
and wider light brown
bands (Figure 11). Infected Figure 11. Buckeye Rot of
fruit remains firm for a tomato fruit.
time, then rots rapidly, sometimes with a white,
cottony growth in the center of the brown area. Root
rot symptoms include dark brown discoloration of the
roots and lower stem, resulting in death of the plant.

Management —

1. Plant only in well-drained soils.

2. Use deep tillage to reduce soil compaction
and improve internal soil drainage.

3. Rotate with corn or other grass crops.

4. Mulch beneath plants to reduce soil contact
with fruit.

5. Fungicides — see current MP154, Arkansas
Plant Disease Control Products Guide (under
Publications at www.uaex.edu).

Late Blight (Phytophthora infestans)

Late blight is one of the most devastating
diseases of tomato. This disease can cause
100 percent losses when environmental conditions
are favorable for disease.

Symptoms — Leaves, flowers, stems and fruit
may all be infected. Lesions first appear on the
leaves, petioles or stems as small water-soaked spots
which grow rapidly into large pale green to brown
lesions. A grayish-white fuzzy mold grows on the
lesions (Figure 12). Initially, the mold can be
observed on both sides of the leaf but later is found
on the underside. Affected tissues become brown and

=== New Page ===

shriveled and die. The
lesions on the fruit
begin as olive-colored
greasy spots. These
may enlarge to engulf
the entire fruit.
Whitish-gray fuzzy
mold can also occur on
the fruit, followed by
fruit rot. Rotted fruit
and tomato vines let off ea
a nasty odor. Figure 12. Late Blight of tomato
on leaves.
Management —
1. Tomatoes should be grown on raised beds in
well-drained soil.
2. Fruit should be prevented from touching the
ground by staking or mulching.
3. Avoid overwatering.
4. There are now some very good resistant
cultivars.
5. Fungicides — see current MP154, Arkansas
Plant Disease Control Products Guide (under
Publications at www.uaex.edu).

Early Blight (Alternaria solani)

This is a very common
disease of Arkansas
tomatoes and is favored by
warm, rainy weather.

The fungus survives on
seed, infected plant debris,
volunteer tomatoes or
certain other plants like
potatoes, eggplants, horse
nettles or black nightshade.
Poor fertilization favors the

disease as well. Figure 13. Early Blight of

tomato leaves.
Symptoms -— Spots form

on leaves, stems and fruit. Leaf spots start as small,
dark brown areas, sometimes with a yellow border
(Figure 13). Leaf spots grow rapidly under favorable
conditions, forming lighter brown bands with a dark
center. Stem spots have even more noticeable rings
(Figure 14) than leaf spots and may cause plant death
if the stem is girdled. Fruit spots start at or near the
stem attachment and also develop a dark, ringed

Figure 15. Early Blight of
tomato fruit.

}
Figure 14. Early Blight of
tomato stems. Note concen-
tric rings of infected tissue.

appearance (Figure 15). Spots are leathery-feeling and
may be covered by a blackish “dust,” consisting of
numerous microscopic spores of the fungus. Infected
fruit often drops off soon after infection.

Management —

1. Grow resistant varieties.

2. Avoid diseased transplants, if possible.

3. Eliminate weeds and volunteer tomatoes and
rotate to other areas every two years.

4. Use proper fertilization.

5. Fungicides — see current MP154, Arkansas
Plant Disease Control Products Guide (under
Publications at www.uaex.edu).

Fusarium Root Rot (Fusarium oxysporum
f.sp. radicis-lycopersici)

This is a sporadic problem in Arkansas, associated
with long-term tomato production on the same fields.
It is spread with infested soil, moving water or
infested crop debris.

Symptoms — Older (lower) leaves turn yellow
along the edges as the fruit starts to ripen, followed
by browning and collapse of the leaf petiole.
Symptoms progress upward to the younger leaves.
Some plants may wilt and die quickly, while others
wilt more slowly and live through harvest. Roots
have a dry, brown rot of the outer tissue, and a
sunken, dark area may develop in the stem just
above the soil. Pinkish spore masses of the fungus
may form on this dark area during wet weather or
under frequent irrigation.

Management —

1. Use only disease-free transplants in soil free
of the fungus.

2. Grow resistant varieties, if available.

3. Rotate to disease-free soil, if possible.

Fusarium Wilt (Fusarium oxysporum f.sp.
lycopersici)

This is one of the most
common and important wilt
diseases of tomatoes around
the world and has been
significant in Arkansas
production as well. It is
favored by hot weather and
sandy, acid soils. The
fungus survives in infested
soil for several years and
can be spread by anything
that moves soil about,
including irrigation.

Symptoms — Young,
infected plants may be
severely stunted. Older
leaves may droop down-
ward, turning yellow. When

Figure 16. Fusarium Wilt of
tomato. Note brownish dis-
coloration along outer edges of
stem; pith is healthy.

=== New Page ===

the lower stem of affected plants is split, a brown
discoloration is evident on each side of the stem, just
beneath the outer skin (Figure 16). The pith (center of
stem) remains white and healthy. Leaves may turn
yellow on only one side of the plant. Eventually,
infected plants start wilting during the hot afternoon,
recovering at night and early morning. Finally, infected
plants collapse and die.

Management —

1. Grow resistant varieties. Since the fungus
has different races that can attack some
resistant varieties, choose varieties with
resistance to the most races possible.

2. Lime acid soils to raise the pH to 6.5-7;
however, do not over-lime as alkaline soils
can cause other problems.

3. Use nitrate forms of nitrogen fertilizer and
avoid ammonium forms.

4. Prevent introduction of the fungus into your
field or garden by using known disease-free
transplants and soil.

5. Do not use flood irrigation and avoid pond or
other surface-water irrigation because these
water supplies can be contaminated with
the fungus.

6. Long-term rotations (five to seven years out of
tomato) may help.

Septoria Leaf Spot (Septoria lycopersici)

This fungal disease is very common in Arkansas,
especially under warm, splashing rain or overhead
irrigation. The fungus survives in infected tomato
debris or weed hosts like horse nettle. It may also be
introduced on seed.

Symptoms —
Spots on lower leaves
usually show up
about first fruit set
and may also occur
on stems and
branches. Spots are
round, about '/s inch
across, with dark
brown borders and
light gray centers
(Figure 17). The
centers may contain
tiny black spots
called pycnidia that
contain spores of the
fungus. Young spots
may be surrounded by a yellow halo as well. The
disease progresses up the plant, from the older to
younger leaves, spread by splashing rain or overhead
irrigation. Fruit infection is very rare.

Figure 17. Septoria Leaf Spot of
tomato.

Management —
1. Fungicides — see current MP154, Arkansas
Plant Disease Control Products Guide (under

Publications at www.uaex.edu).

2. Rotate out of tomato for two years if the
problem is persistent. Do not use Irish
potatoes in the rotation.

3. Control horse nettle around or in the crop.

4. Thoroughly bury or destroy tomato debris
after harvest.

5. Use overhead irrigation as infrequently as
possible and during late morning so plants
can dry off before nightfall.

6. Do not work fields while foliage is wet to
avoid spreading the fungus to uninfected
leaves or plants.

Southern Blight (Sclerotium rolfsii)

This is a common problem in Arkansas on soils
that have grown tomatoes for several years. The
fungus survives as hard, brown “sclerotia” that look
like tiny BBs in the soil or on infected tomato debris.
It is spread by anything that moves soil or debris in
the field. Sclerotia can survive for several years
without a host.

Symptoms — A
large, brown to dark
brown rot appears on
the stem at the soil
line which spreads up
and around the stem,
causing a rapid wilt of
the plant. Usually a
white, cottony growth
develops over the
surface of the rot
area, and sclerotia

form on the white y a
growth over a period Figure 18. Southern Blight of tomato.
of a few days Note white mycelium and numerous

brown sclerotia on surface.
(Figure 18). The scle-
rotia are spherical, starting out as whitish balls
which turn red, then brown, and are about ‘/is inch
across. Many sclerotia form on the infected stem. If
young plants are infected, they may fall over at the
soil line.

Management —

1. Rotate with corn or wheat for one to two
years. Avoid beans or eggplants in the
rotation.

Deep plow the soil to bury infected plants.
Use only disease-free transplants and soil.
Plastic mulch may help somewhat.

Fertilize to minimize disease.

Fungicides — see current MP154, Arkansas
Plant Disease Control Products Guide (under

Publications at www.uaex.edu).

Verticillium Wilt (Verticillium
albo-atrum, V. dahliae)

This is a sporadic disease in Arkansas, favored by
long-term tomato production, cool weather and high
PH soils. The fungus survives as micro-sclerotia in
infected crop debris and can attack many other plants.

=== New Page ===

Verticillium wilt is increased by root wounding from
cultivators or root-knot nematode feeding.

Symptoms — The wilt symptoms can be confused
with Fusarium or bacterial wilt. Infected plants may
wilt only slightly at first, usually during the hottest
part of the day, and recover at night. Later, lower
leaves may show whitening or yellowing between the
veins. This discoloration may become fan-shaped and
more yellow over time. Like Fusarium wilt, a
brownish discoloration forms under the outer skin of
the lower stem and can be observed if split length-
wise. The pith remains white and healthy.

Management —

1. Grow resistant varieties with resistance to as
many races of the fungus as possible.

2. Rotate out of tomatoes for two years.

3. Destroy all weeds on a regular basis as they
may be hosts for the fungus.

4. Destroy all infected plants immediately.

White Mold (Timber Rot) (Sclerotinia
sclerotiorum)

Similar to southern blight, this disease is
associated with long-term tomato production. The
fungus attacks many other crop plants and weeds
as well. It survives as large black sclerotia in the
soil and is spread by anything that moves soil
around. Infection is favored by wet weather or
overhead irrigation.

Symptoms —
Infected areas of the
stem become soft and
watery and usually form
around branch joints.
Unlike southern blight,
infection may occur
above the soil line.
Infected areas grow up
and down the stem,
turning the infected area
a bleached, bone color. A
white cottony growth
appears on the infected
areas under wet condi-
tions, and black sclerotia up to Ys inch long form
inside the stem (Figure 19). Eventually, infected
plants wilt and die. The fungus can spread to nearby

Figure 19. White Mold of tomato.
Note large black sclerotium
inside split stem.

plants, resulting in patches of dying, wilted tomatoes.

Fruit may be infected where they join the plant,
developing a gray rot sometimes with a ring of black
sclerotia around the calyx.

Management —

1. Rotate to uninfested areas, if possible.

2. Do not rotate with sunflowers or snap beans
since they are very susceptible and may
increase this disease.

3. Destroy infected plants by removal and
burning.

Root-Knot Nematodes (RKN)

Root-knot nematodes are primarily associated
with long-term tomato production on sandy soils.
Root-knot nematodes persist in the soil, building up
during the summer months while feeding on roots of
tomatoes or other susceptible plants. Many other
plants are susceptible.

Symptoms —
Roots develop galls
(swollen areas)
caused by feeding of
the nematodes
(Figure 20).
Swellings vary in
shape and size.
Affected plants may
wilt during the day
and recover at night
and may be stunted
or grow poorly.

Figure 20. Root-Knot Nematode.

Management —

1. Grow resistant varieties.

2. Rotate with grass crops or fallow — do not use
corn as it is susceptible.

3. Plant nematode-suppressive crops such as
marigolds or canola and till debris into the
soil prior to tomato production.

Physiological Disorders
Blossom-End Rot

This is caused by a deficiency of calcium in
developing tomato fruit. This may be due to a lack of
calcium in the soil or extreme fluctuations in watering,
which can decrease calcium uptake. Overfertilization
with nitrogen can increase the problem.

Symptoms — Early symptoms include a slight
water-soaked or sunken area at the blossom end of the
fruit. This area soon develops into a large brown to
blackish spot that constantly increases in size until the
fruit ripens (Figure 21). Affected tissue may shrink
inward and have a dry, leathery feel.

Management —

1. Have the soil tested. Apply lime if pH is low.
Agricultural lime or gypsum may be used but
should be applied several months in advance
of planting. A soil pH of 6.5-6.8 is ideal
for tomatoes.

Figure 21. Blossom-End Rot of tomato.

=== New Page ===

2. Apply a calcium chloride product such as
Stop-Rot, Tomato Saver or Blossom-End Rot
Preventer to plants beginning at early
fruiting (first green fruits should be about
1/2 inches in diameter). Rates of different
products vary, but 4 pounds actual calcium
chloride in 100 gallons of water per acre is
a standard recommendation. This spray
should be applied every seven days for
four weeks and only applied in the early
morning when temperatures are cool to
avoid burning the plants.

3. Mulch plants and irrigate regularly to avoid
extremes in water supply. Tomato plants
should receive about one to two inches of
water per week during the summer for
proper growth.

4. Remove affected fruit when first observed to
encourage formation of new, healthy fruit.

Catfacing

This is caused by cold
nights during early fruit set
and development.

Symptoms — Fruit is
grossly deformed at the blossom
end during growth (Figure 22).

Management —

1. Spread out planting
dates. Avoid planting
too early.

2. Protecting the plants during cool nights with
cloth or plastic covers may help.

Figure 22. Catfacing of
tomato.

Fruit Cracking

Cracking is usually caused by rapid fruit
development, too frequent watering or overfertiliza-
tion. Some varieties appear to be more susceptible,
especially tomato types with high sugar content.

Symptoms — Affected fruit becomes callused or
cracks, usually vertically (Figure 23).

Management —
1. Avoid overwatering and excessive fertilization.

Figure 23. Fruit cracking of tomato.

Lack of Fruit Set

This is sometimes caused in Arkansas by hot
(>75°F) temperatures at night during flowering to
early fruit development and may also be caused by
drift injury from various herbicides.

Management —

1. Space plantings at two- to four-week
intervals to avoid high temperature injury
to all plants.

2. Use hot-set tomato varieties like Heatwave
or Solar Set, if available, in at least some of
the plantings.

3. Follow herbicide label directions carefully if
using around tomatoes.

Photo Acknowledgments: Figure 1, Dr. James Correll, Arkansas Department of Plant Pathology; Figure 17, Rachel Bearden, University
of Arkansas Cooperative Extension Service; Figure 23, Keith Gresham, University of Arkansas Cooperative Extension Service; Figures 3,

9, 13 and 14, Dr. Stephen Vann (retired), University of Arkansas Cooperative Extension Service. Other figures, Sherrie Smith, University
of Arkansas Cooperative Extension Service.

Printed by University of Arkansas Cooperative Extension Service Printing Services.

SHERRIE SMITH is a plant pathologist/instructor with the University
of Arkansas System Division of Agriculture and is located at the Plant
Health Clinic, 2601 N. Young Avenue, Fayetteville, Arkansas.

FSA7568-PD-8-2016RV

Issued in furtherance of Cooperative Extension work, Acts of May 8 and
June 30, 1914, in cooperation with the U.S. Department of Agriculture,
Director, Cooperative Extension Service, University of Arkansas. The
University of Arkansas System Division of Agriculture offers all its Extension
and Research programs and services without regard to race, color, sex, gender
identity, sexual orientation, national origin, religion, age, disability, marital or
veteran status, genetic information, or any other legally protected status, and
is an Affirmative Action/Equal Opportunity Employer.