# Document 122433

Laurel Wilt: A New and Devastating
Disease of Redbay Caused by a Fun-
gal Symbiont of the Exotic Redbay
Ambrosia Beetle

Stephen W. Fraedrich', Thomas C. Harrington’ and
Robert J. Rabaglia®

'USDA Forest Service, Southern Research Station, 320
Green St., Athens, GA 30602; Email: sfraedrich@fs.fed.us,
*Department of Plant Pathology, Iowa State University,
Ames, IA 50011; Email: tcharrin@iastate.edu, 7>USDA
Forest Service, Forest Health Protection, 1601 North Kent
Street, RPC7, Arlington, VA 22209; Email:
brabaglia@fs.fed.us

T.. mysterious death of redbay (Persea borbonia (L.) Spreng.)
trees on Hilton Head Island, South Carolina, and surrounding
areas was first reported in local newspapers in 2003. Thousands
of redbays were dying in the low country of South Carolina, and
by the end of 2004 officials on Hilton Head were estimating that
they had lost 75-80% of the island’s redbays. Many theories were
initially advanced for the mortality including the role of beetles
and the influence of drought followed by above average rainfall
during the late 1990s and early 2000s.

Dizinbation af Counties with Rectay Wl! Ctssase” Syrmptocte
tay Year of (ital Oeowerien

Distribution of laurel wilt by county in South Carolina, Georgia
and Florida. Counties are color coded by year of initial disease
detection. (Information compiled and graph produced by James
Johnson (Georgia Forestry Commission) Laurie Reid (South
Carolina Forestry Commission) and Albert “Bud” Mayfield
(Florida Division of Forestry).

14

HE pril 2007 NEWSLETTER of the MICHIGAN ENTOMOLOGICAL SOCIETY V52(1&2)
HE MES Homepage on the WWW: http://insects.ummz.|sa.umich.edu/mes/

A site visit
was made to
Hilton Head
Island in
November
2004, and
redbays were
found in
various stages
of decline.
Many trees
were dead
while others
exhibited dieback of individual branches or portions of tree
crowns. Leaves on affected trees developed a reddish to purplish
brown discoloration and persisted on the branches long after
trees had died. The sapwood of affected trees exhibited a black
discoloration in the outer sapwood. Small entrance holes and
tunnels of an ambrosia beetle (Coleoptera: Curculionidae,
Scolytinae) were often associated with the discolored sapwood,
although these holes were often infrequent and difficult to find on
some trees. Ambrosia beetles from tunnels in branch and stem
samples were subsequently identified as Xyleborus glabratus
Eichhoff, the redbay ambrosia beetle. This non-native beetle was
first trapped in the United States in 2002 near Savannah, Georgia
as part of the Early Detection and Monitoring Project sponsored
by the USDA Forest Service (Haack 2006, Rabaglia 2003). The
association of X. glabratus with redbays on Hilton Head Island
was the first indication that this beetle was established in a forest
ecosystem within the United States. Xyleborus glabratus is
native to Asia (e.g., India, Japan, Taiwan) where it is often
associated with aromatic plant species in the family Lauraceae
(e.g., Lindera latifolia and Litsea elongata) and other families
(Wood and Bright, 1992; Rabaglia, 2006). It is presumed that the
beetle was introduced to the USA on solid wood packing material.

Lateral view of Xyleborus glabratus

Samples of the discolored sapwood were plated on various
agar media and an unknown fungus was consistently isolated.
The fungus produces terminal conidia on conidiophores as well
as a yeast-like phase
similar to species found
in the genus Raffaelea.
Subsequent analyses of
the ribosomal DNA
sequences determined
that the fungus was
related to Ophiostoma
spp., and particularly to
species known to be
associated with ambrosia
beetles. Many of the
fungal symbionts o:
ambrosia beetles are
assigned to the anamor-
phic genera Ambrosiella
or Raffaelea (Batra, 1967;
Cassar and Blackwell,
1996; Harrington, 2005;
Jones and Blackwell,

Georgia (October 2006).

=== New Page ===

1998). The genus Raffaelea appears to be the best generic
placement of the new fungal species. A series of field and
laboratory studies have confirmed that this Raffaelea sp. is
pathogenic to redbay. The fungus is consistently isolated from
X. glabratus, and the beetle is capable of introducing the
pathogen into healthy redbay seedlings when challenged with
the beetle.

Since our initial evaluations on Hilton Head Island in 2004,
surveys by state forest health specialists have found the wilt in
30 counties in the coastal plains of Georgia, Florida and South
Carolina. Xyleborus glabratus and the Raffaelea sp. have been
consistently associated with dead and dying trees throughout
the range of the problem. In addition, sassafras (Sassafras
albidum (Nuttall) Nees) mortality has been observed in several
coastal counties of Georgia, and X. glabratus and the Raffaelea
sp. were associated with these dead and dying trees. Addi-
tional laboratory studies have determined that the Raffaelea sp.
is pathogenic to sassafras and other members of the Lauraceae
found in the southeastern USA.

Redbay (Persea borbonia (L.) Spreng.) is an attractive,
aromatic, evergreen tree of small-to-medium size that is common
in forests of the Atlantic and Gulf coastal plains of the southern
USA (Brendemuehl, 1990). Fruit of redbay is an important food
source for songbirds, wild turkey and other animals, and deer
browse upon foliage (Brendemuehl, 1990). Redbay also serves
as a primary larval host for the Palamedes swallowtail (Papilio
palamedes Drury) (Scott, 1986). In the Southeast, laurel wilt
poses a threat to redbay and sassafras as well as other species
such as pondberry (Lindera melissaefolia (Walter) Blume), and
pondspice (Litsea aestivalis L. Fernald), which are endangered
or threatened plant species. Worldwide, many important
species of plants are found in the Lauraceae, and there is great
diversification of this family in Central and South America. At
this time it is uncertain if “laurel wilt” poses a threat to plants in
other areas of the Americas, but the potential for spread of this
new disease is a concern.

There is much to be learned about this new pathogen and its
vector relationships. We assume that the fungus is native to
Asia and that it was introduced to the USA with the redbay

Wilted redbays at Hunting Island State Park,
South Carolina (November, 2006)

ambrosia beetle. Thus
far, it appears that the
redbay ambrosia beetle
is the only vector, and
the incidence of the
disease in the USA
coincides with the
presence of this beetle,
which is spreading
rapidly.

References

Batra, LR. 1967.
Ambrosia fungi: A
taxonomic revision
and nutritional
studies of some
species. Mycologia
59: 976-1017.

Brendemuehl, RH. 1990.
Persea borbonia (L.)
Spreng. Redbay.
Pages 503-506 in
Silvics of North
America. . Volume
2. Hardwoods. R.
M. Burns and L. H.
Honkala, Technical Coordinators Agriculture Handbook 654. US
Government Printing Office. Washington, DC.

4 “J .
Sapwood discoloration in wilted redbay on
Jekyl Island, Georgia (December 2006)

Cassar, S and M Blackwell. 1996. Convergent origins of ambrosia fungi.
Mycologia 88: 596-601.

Haack, RA. 2006. Exotic bark- and wood-boring Coleoptera in the United
States: recent establishments and interceptions. Can. J. For. Res. 36:
269-288.

Harrington, TC. 2005. Ecology and evolution of mycophagous bark beetles
and their fungal partners. pp. 257-292 in Insect-Fungal Associations:
Ecology and Evolution. Vega, F. E. and M. Blackwell, eds. Oxford
University Press, Inc. New York.

Jones, KG and M Blackwell. 1998. Phylogenetic analysis of ambrosial
species in the genus Raffaelea based on 18S rDNA sequences.
Mycological Research 102:661-665.

Rabaglia, R. 2003a. Xyleborus glabratus [online]. Available from:

http://spfnic. fs.fed.us/exfor/data/pestreports.cfm?

pestidval=148&langdisplay=english [cited 20 February
2007].

Rabaglia, RJ., SA Dole, and AI Cognato. 2006. Review of American
Xyleborina (Coleoptera : Curculionidae : Scolytinae) occurring North
of Mexico, with an illustrated key. Annals of the Entomological
Society of America 99:1034-1056.

Scott, JA. 1986. The Butterflies of North America: A Natural History and
Field Guide. Stanford University Press. Stanford, CA. 583 pp.

Wood, SL and DE Bright. 1992. A catalog of Scolytidae and Platypodidae
(Coleoptera), Part 2: Taxonomic index. Great Basin Naturalist
Memoirs 13: 1-1553.

April 2007 NEWSLETTER of the MICHIGAN ENTOMOLOGICAL SOCIETY V52(1&2) |_|
MES Homepage on the WWW: http://insects.ummz.|sa.umich.edu/mes/

m5