# Document 122691

RESEARCH & EXTENSION

University of Arkansas System

Uy A DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE

Agriculture and Natural Resources

FSA6114

Submitting Plant Samples
for Disease Diagnosis

Sherrie Smith
Plant Pathologist/
Instructor,

Plant Health Clinic

Arkansas Is
Our Campus

Visit our web site at:
https:/www.uaex.uada.edu

Despite all of the tender loving
care that you give your plants, they
may contract a disease or insect infes-
tation. Plant diseases may be caused
by fungi, bacteria, viruses, viroids
(virus-like organisms), phytoplasmas,
protozoa, nematodes and parasitic
plants. Although not categorized as
diseases, the damage done by insects
and mites may also severely impact
plant health. Nutritional deficiencies
and/or excessive amounts of nutrients
may damage plants as well, some-
times mimicking disease symptoms
and making diagnosis difficult.

Plant health is dependent on a
number of factors including the proper
soil type, water requirements and
sun exposure needed for the crop you
are growing. A pint of soil collected
from the planting site and submitted
to your local county Extension office
for analysis prior to planting can be
invaluable in preventing problems.
When problems do occur, accurate
disease identification is crucial in
planning an effective control program
to preserve or maintain a healthy
plant. No plant is immune to all
diseases. Every plant has its own set
of disease problems, and an accurate
diagnosis of the problem is the first
step in solving the problem.

There are hundreds of diseases
that attack plants in Arkansas.
Some diseases are easy to recognize
while some are difficult and will
require laboratory analysis before a
diagnosis can be obtained. Your local
county Extension agent is trained to

recognize many of the common dis-
eases that affect plants in Arkansas,
and in many cases, a call to your
county Extension office will be all
that is necessary to obtain a diagno-
sis. However, if the county agent is
unable to identify the “culprit,” then
a sample of your plants, along with
some background information, can be
sent through the local county office to
the Plant Health Clinic located at
the University farm in Fayetteville.
When the diagnosis has been com-
pleted, the report will be sent to both
the county agent and the client.

An accurate disease diagnosis is
the first essential step in designing an
effective plant disease management
program. Early detection followed by
identification allows the grower to
initiate steps to minimize economic
or aesthetic losses. The accuracy
of the disease diagnosis is directly
related to the type of plant sam-
ple submitted to the clinic. You
can take two steps to help make an
accurate diagnosis.

First, a good sample should
represent the range of symptoms
that you observe. Symptoms include
leaf spots, fruit rots, wilting, yellow-
ing, etc. Plants that are dry or
completely rotted are of little use
for a diagnosis, so the fresher the
sample, the better the chances of a
correct disease identification. Collect
your samples early in the week. This
minimizes the possibility of the
sample being held over the weekend
at the post office.

University of Arkansas, United States Department of Agriculture, and County Governments Cooperating

=== New Page ===

In addition to the physical sample, the second
thing that you can do to help ensure an accurate
diagnosis is to provide important background infor-
mation about the plant. Accurate information is
extremely important in formulating a diagnosis and
offering control suggestions to you. Please provide
this information to your county Extension office, or
include the information with the sample if mailing it
directly to the Plant Health Clinic. Interested parties
may request an account at www.dddi.org/UA/ and fill
out the information online. Be sure to include such
things as (1) your name, phone number and e-mail
address, (2) name of the plant, (3) description of the
problem, (4) age of the plant, (5) sun exposure, (6) any
drainage issues and (7) any fungicide, weed killers,
insecticides and fertilizers used. This information
should be as complete as possible to give a clear
history and description of the problem. If possible,
submit a photograph of the affected area in the land-
scape, garden or field. Photos are especially useful for
lawn or field problems.

Guidelines for Collecting and
Submitting Plant Samples

Selecting an appropriate plant sample is
essential for an accurate diagnosis. Please follow
the guidelines below when collecting and submitting
plant samples for disease diagnosis to your local
county Extension office:

1. Submit only freshly collected specimens. If
possible, collect several specimens showing a
progression or range of symptoms. Keep speci-
mens refrigerated until they are brought in for
examination. Bring samples into the Extension
office during the first part of the week.

2. Where specific plant parts are affected (leaf spots,
root rots, fruit rots, flower blights, stem cankers),
submit the affected part in as many stages of the

disease as you can distinguish. If practical, sub-
mit the whole plant. Enclose specimens in plastic
bags, or in the case of ripe fruit in paper bags.
DO NOT ADD WATER OR WET PAPER TO THE
BAG. Additional moisture will speed decay.

3. For plants showing wilting, yellowing, stunting or
general decline, collect the entire plant including
the root system. Do not pull the plant out of the
ground. Dig the plant carefully so as to disturb
the root system as little as possible. Shake away
excess soil. DO NOT WASH SOIL FROM THE
ROOT SYSTEM. Enclose the root system in a
plastic bag and seal it at the base of the plant
stem to prevent soil spillage. Then enclose the
entire plant in another plastic bag and seal.

DO NOT ADD ADDITIONAL MOISTURE.

4. For leaf spots, submit leaves showing various
stages of infection. If possible, bring in twigs or
branches with leaves still attached. Enclose
leaves in a plastic bag. Individual leaves may be
placed between layers of DRY paper towels.

5. For lawn and turf diseases, submit a 3- to 4-inch
diameter plug taken where the healthy and
diseased areas meet so the sample will contain
both diseased and healthy turf. Take the plug
2 to 3 inches deep and include roots and the
adhering soil. Samples can be dug with a garden
trowel or small spade. Enclose sample plugs in a
plastic bag. DO NOT ADD ADDITIONAL
MOISTURE.

For specific additional information regarding
collecting and submitting plant samples for
disease examination, contact your local county
Extension office, or contact:

Plant Health Clinic
2601 N. Young Avenue
Fayetteville, AR 72704

Printed by University of Arkansas Cooperative Extension Service Printing Services.

SHERRIE SMITH is plant pathologist/instructor with the
University of Arkansas System Division of Agriculture located at
the Plant Health Clinic in Fayetteville.

FSA6114-PD-3-2016RV

Issued in furtherance of Cooperative Extension work, Acts of May 8
and June 30, 1914, in cooperation with the U.S. Department of
Agriculture, Director, Cooperative Extension Service, University of
Arkansas. The University of Arkansas System Division of Agricul-
ture offers all its Extension and Research programs and services
without regard to race, color, sex, gender identity, sexual orientation,
national origin, religion, age, disability, marital or veteran status,
genetic information, or any other legally protected status, and is an
Affirmative Action/Equal Opportunity Employer.