# Document 122726

DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE .
UA tice ntastos Agriculture and Natural Resources

University of Arkansas System

FSA7554
Lich f
Stephen Vann Introduction help break up the surface of rocks,
Assistant Professor - thus initiating soil formation.
. Lichens are specialized organisms
Urban Plant Pathologist .
typically composed of an Ascomycete Ss
: ; ymptoms
fungus combined with a green or blue-
green alga. The alga receives food and Lichens are commonly mistaken
protection from the fungus, and the for plant diseases; however, they are
fungus receives some nutrition from not considered “true” parasites or
the alga. Lichens are distributed pathogens of landscape shrubs and
worldwide. They are most often seen trees. In rare instances, if lichen
growing on the bark of many living growth becomes very dense on trees,
and dead trees (Figure 1). They can small branches and twigs may be

killed. This can be explained by a
reduction in light absorption or gas
exchange to the stems. Slow-growing
or declining plants are more likely to
support the growth of lichens. These
plants usually become stressed for
reasons other than lichens.

Life Cycle

Lichens are classified into three
groups as to their body form. The
lichen body may be leaflike in
organization, or foliose (Figure 2),

Figure 1. Lichen growth on trunk of
oak tree.

Arkansas Is also occur on the surface of rocks, soil,
Our Campus fence posts and even on utility wires.

Many lichens are quite susceptible to
various air pollutants and can even

Visit our web site at: serve as indicators of air pollution.
https://www.uaex.uada.edu They are also food for animals and Figure 2. Foliose lichen on oak twig.

University of Arkansas, United States Department of Agriculture, and County Governments Cooperating

=== New Page ===

crust-like, or crustose (Figure 3) or shrublike, or
fruticose (Figure 4). Lichens are dispersed by frag-
ments of the lichen body being carried by wind,
water or animals.

Figure 3. Crustose lichen on rock.

Management

Control in the home landscape is usually not
necessary. If lichens become too unsightly or abundant,
they can usually be brushed off stems or tree trunks
with a stiff brush when the lichens are dry.

Figure 4. Shrublike (fruticose) lichen (photo
courtesy R. Tumlison, Henderson State Univ.).

Printed by University of Arkansas Cooperative Extension Service Printing Services.

DR. STEPHEN VANN is assistant professor - urban plant pathologist
with the University of Arkansas Division of Agriculture in Little Rock.

FSA7554-PD-5-13RWC

Issued in furtherance of Cooperative Extension work, Acts of May 8 and
June 30, 1914, in cooperation with the U.S. Department of Agriculture,
Director, Cooperative Extension Service, University of Arkansas. The
Arkansas Cooperative Extension Service offers its programs to all eligible
persons regardless of race, color, national origin, religion, gender, age,
disability, marital or veteran status, or any other legally protected status,
and is an Affirmative Action/Equal Opportunity Employer.