# Document 122784

RESEARCH & EXTENSION

University of Arkansas System

Uy A DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE

Stephen Vann
Assistant Professor -
Extension Urban
Plant Pathologist

James Robbins
Professor - Extension
Specialist - Ornamental
Horticulture

Arkansas Is
Our Campus

Visit our web site at:
https://www.uaex.uada.edu

Agriculture and Natural Resources

FSA7525

Daylily Rust

In mid-August 2001, a new rust
disease was confirmed on daylilies
(Hemerocallis) growing in Arkansas.
To date, the rust has been reported in
30 states and is currently confined to
the daylily. The disease, which is
caused by the fungus Puccinia
hemerocallidis, was first identified in
Florida in the fall of 1999. The rust is
native to Asia and may have been
introduced into the U.S. from Central
America. Daylily varieties differ in
their disease susceptibility.

Typical Symptoms

Initial symptoms on the foliage
include water-soaked spots that may
appear 3 to 5 days after infection.
These initial spots are typically circu-
lar to elongated and appear on either
the upper or lower leaf surface. As
infection progresses, raised yellow-
orange to rust-brown colored pustules
develop. Pustules are most prominent
on the underside of the leaf but can
develop on the upper leaf surface. On
more resistant cultivars, the lesion
may only be a yellow fleck. The rust
pustules appear to develop rapidly,
and spores of the fungus are easily
spread by wind and splashing water.
Pustules are most common on the
leaves; however, they have been
observed on the flower stalk (scape).

The daylily rust can easily be
viewed in the field with a simple 10X
hand lens. Suspected pustules can be
wiped with an ordinary white facial

tissue. An orange-yellow stain on the
tissue will result if the rust is present
on the leaves.

Daylily rust can be easily confused
with other leaf problems such as
insect damage (e.g., mites) and leaf
streak disease, which is caused by
another fungus. Spots associated with
leaf streak diseases are not raised and
do not yield the orange-yellow stain on
white facial tissue.

Controls

1. Affected plant tissue should be
removed and properly disposed of.

2. After cut-back, apply one of the
following chemicals according to
label directions:

a. Propiconazole (Banner
Maxx™, Fertilome Liquid
Systemic Fungicide)

b. Azoxystrobin (Heritage™)

c. Myclobutanil (Eagle™,
Spectracide Immunox)
Alternate between two of the
above fungicides at the label
rate to protect new foliage that
is forming on the plant.

Resources

Arkansas Rust Ratings:
http://daylilies.uaex.uada.edu/
http://www.daylilies.org/ahs_dictionary
/daylily_rust.html
http://web.ncf.ca/ah748/rust.html
http://plantclinic.cornell.edu
/factsheets/daylilyrust.pdf

References to commercial products or trade names are made with the understanding that no
discrimination is intended and no endorsement by the Cooperative Extension Service is implied. The

user is responsible for determining that the intended use is consistent with the label of the product being
used. Read and follow label directions.

University of Arkansas, United States Department of Agriculture, and County Governments Cooperating

=== New Page ===

Stages of daylily rust development (underside of leaves): Left: later stages Right: initial

Daylily rust symptoms (2 left leaves)

Leaf streak disease (5 right leaves)

Printed by University of Arkansas Cooperative Extension Service Printing Services.

DR. STEPHEN VANN is assistant professor - Extension urban plant
pathologist and DR. JAMES ROBBINS is professor - Extension

specialist - ornamental horticulture, University of Arkansas Division of

Agriculture, Little Rock.

FSA7525-PD-11-11RV

Issued in furtherance of Cooperative Extension work, Acts of May 8 and
June 30, 1914, in cooperation with the U.S. Department of Agriculture,
Director, Cooperative Extension Service, University of Arkansas. The
Arkansas Cooperative Extension Service offers its programs to all eligible
persons regardless of race, color, national origin, religion, gender, age,
disability, marital or veteran status, or any other legally protected status,
and is an Affirmative Action/Equal Opportunity Employer.