# Document 122972

UA

DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE
RESEARCH & EXTENSION
University of Arkansas System

University of Arkansas Irrigation Yield Contest

Entry Form

Thank you for your interest in participating in the University of Arkansas Irrigation Yield Contest.
Please complete an entry form for the entered field. This form must be completed in full and
signed. If you have any questions, please call your county extension agent UA Rice Research
Extension Center office at 870-673-2661 and ask for the help from the Irrigation group.
Incomplete forms will be returned. Some information on the entry form must be verified by a
contest supervisor. Early submission is appreciated. Cash will not be accepted. Return this form
with payment to:

Irrigation Yield Contest

University of Arkansas Rice Research Experiment Station

2900 HWY 130 east

Stuttgart, AR 72160

Entry Deadline: Postmarked by June 30.

Contest Entrants’ Checklist
1. Identify the contest field
2. Acquire a flow meter
3. Lay pipe
4. Call Supervisor or UADA staff member to seal the flow meter , read the flow meter and
certify the entry form
Turn in the entry form by June 30.
Include FSA for 578 with entry
7. Include a map of the field with entry form showing field border, water source , and
direction of fall

an

Entrant Information
Name
Farm/Company Name
Address

City State Zip
COUNTY.

E-mail address

Cell phone Number
entered CROP

GPS coordinates LAT. LONG.
legal description (County, Township, Range, Section, etc)

=== New Page ===

Entry Fees
$100 per entry. (Entry fee will defray the charge of 3rd party judges or ACOs.)

Crop Information

Initial Flow Meter Reading
Flow Meter Units : Gallons x 100__— Gallons X 1000___s Acre-inch x 0.01.
Acre-inch x 0.001

Initial Flow Meter Reading and Function Verified by an Approved Contest Official?
Flow Meter Serial Number

Flow meter brand

Well power supply (Diesel, Electric, Natural Gas, Propane)
Water source : ground welll surface water relift

After the flow meter is installed the entrant or a judge must take a photo of the flow meter installed showing
the serial number, initial reading, and units. The entrant must take a photo of the meter before beginning
irrigation. (Share these photos with supervisor).

Please indicate technology that you use on your contest field and other fields

Used on Contest Field (Vv) | Percent of other fields that use (%)

Surge valve

Pipe Planner

PHAUCET

Rice Irrigation app

Soil Moisture Sensors

Arkansas Watermark App

Unmanned Aerial Vehicle

Furrow Irrigated Rice

AWD

MIRI no blue gates

MIRI with blue gates

Cascade (no MIRI)

Weather Station

Other:

Variety or Hybrid (If blend, please list all varieties)

Crop Seeding Rate Previous crop
Date Planted Maturity of Hybrid or Variety
Row Spacing (inches) 60 7%20 80 100 240 300 380 OTHER

What is the Soil Texture? (sand, silt, clay)
What is the predominant soil association?

=== New Page ===

The University of Arkansas Cooperative Extension Service reserves the right to have its
designated representative(s) view and/or inspect, with or without prior notice, any field entered
at any time. UA also reserves the right to disqualify any entry in violation of the stated contest
rules.

| hereby certify the above information given on this entry application to be accurate to the best
of my knowledge and believe and agree that all contest information provided by me pursuant to
this Arkansas Irrigation Yield Contest shall be the property of the University of Arkansas and can
be used and distributed at the sole discretion of UA.

Signature of Entrant: Date:

The contest entrant is required to notify and inform the supervisor before beginning
irrigation. The supervisor or UA must certify the initial flow meter reading before the
irrigation begins. If UA certifies, signature not required.

Supervisor name

Supervisor Signature Date:

Initial Flow Meter Reading

Flow Meter Units and multiplier (must check one):

Gallons x 100

Gallons X 1000

Acre-Feet x 0.01

Acre-Feet x 0.001

Date of FIRST IRRIGATION