# Document 122989

CROP MANAG EMENT

Ing ation

by P. Tacker and E. Vories

dequate drainage is essential for maximum

soybean production and becomes even more

important with irrigation. The benefits of

irrigation are usually reduced if a field is
poorly drained. Little can be done to improve
internal soil drainage, so efforts should be directed
to improving surface drainage. Drainage recom-
mendations are covered in more detail in Chapter 6,
“Drainage and Tillage.”

Management Tip
] - An irrigated crop will not achieve its full

potential if adequate surface drainage is
not provided.

Why Inigate?

When growth and yield factors are rated
according to importance, the availability of moisture
always ranks near the top. Yields, up toa point, are
determined by the availability and use of moisture.
Irrigation is a means by which an adequate
moisture supply to the crop can be better assured.
This provides a potential for increased yields over
dryland production and the opportunity to stabilize
year-to-year fluctuations in yield and seed quality.
This yield stabilization can allow a more aggressive
marketing program. In addition, loaning agencies in
some areas are evaluating the percentage of a
grower's soybean acreage that can be irrigated
before they issue a crop production loan. By the
reproductive growth period, when irrigation is often
first needed, approximately 50 to 60 percent of the
production costs are already invested in the crop.
Irrigation serves as insurance against a drought
that can result in yields that do not even cover
production costs, especially for double-crop soybean
production.

Yield

Irrigated yields are well documented in many
research and Extension studies. The Arkansas
Soybean Performance Tests include several varieties

1

that consistently produce in the 50 bu/ac range
when irrigated. These same varieties average 10 to
20 bu/ac less without irrigation. The SRVP (Soybean
Research Verification Program) 16-year (1983-98)
average irrigated yield for 140 full-season
production fields is 47 bu/ac. During this same
period, there were also 57 irrigated double-crop
fields that averaged 44 bu/ac. Many soybean
producers are consistently harvesting 50 to 60 bu/ac
on well-managed, irrigated fields. This indicates
that irrigated yields can vary due to various
production factors, but a realistic irrigated yield for
most acreage is in the 45 to 50 bu/ac range.
However, the 16-year (1983-98) state average
irrigated yield is only 33 bu/ac according to data
from the Arkansas Agricultural Statistics Service.
Even though this is 10 bu/ac greater than the

23 bu/ac state dryland average over the same period,
it indicates that many producers are not achieving
the full yield potential from irrigation. The informa-
tion presented in the remainder of this chapter is
intended to help producers increase and stabilize
irrigated yields.

Management Tip

] i” A realistic irrigated yield goal for most
acreage is 45 to 50 bu/ac.

Water Needs

A soybean crop will produce approximately
2 bu/ac for every inch of water it uses through the
season. Yields in the 40 to 50 bu/ac range require
20 to 25 inches of available soil moisture during the
growing season. The irrigation water needed will
vary depending on the beginning soil moisture and
the rainfall received during the growing season. An
irrigation system needs to be capable of providing
10 to 15 inches of water during the season to assure
an acceptable yield.

Daily water use varies as the crop develops.
Table 8.1 shows the general growth and daily water
use relationship for soybeans.

=== New Page ===

Table 8.1. General Soybean Growth

and Water Use
Water Use
Crop Development (in/day)

Germination and seedling 0.05 - 0.10
Rapid vegetative growth 0.10 - 0.20
Flowering to pod fill 0.20 - 0.30
(full canopy)
Maturity to harvest 0.05 - 0.20

Moisture stress anytime after planting can
reduce growth and yield. The goal of early irrigation
(prior to bloom) is to promote adequate vegetative
growth and node development. Prebloom irrigation
is almost always needed on late-planted and double-
crop soybeans. The crop should be irrigated as
needed to avoid moisture stress and to provide good
soil moisture at seed fill (R5-R6 growth stage),
ensuring that the seeds achieve their maximum
size. Most growers realize the need to irrigate when
the crop is blooming and setting pods. Experience
indicates, however, that many growers tend to be
late with the first irrigation and then quit before the
crop can reach its full potential. The lack of early
and late season irrigation is often responsible for a
soybean crop not reaching its irrigated yield
potential.

Management Tip

_ Adequate moisture is essential throughout

the growing season for maximum yields.

Inigation Scheduling

The timing of irrigation is commonly referred to
as irrigation scheduling. Correct timing is critical to
maximizing yield. Having the ability to irrigate is
important, but it is also essential that a grower have
a commitment to apply irrigation in a timely
manner. Too often growers irrigate by the appear-
ance of the crop. Visual stress, especially during
bloom and pod set, results in yield loss. Also, once
irrigation is started, the time required to finish a
field will result in part of the crop suffering even
greater stress. If the soil moisture can be
determined, then irrigation timing decisions can be
improved.

Determining the soil moisture by visual
observation or by kicking the soil surface is difficult

and can be misleading. The “feel” method can be
used to more accurately determine the soil moisture
condition. This method involves using a shovel or
soil probe to pull a soil sample from the root area. In
general, if the soil forms a hand-rolled ball, the soil
moisture is adequate. A key to this method is to take
samples across the field at different depths to better
determine the soil moisture for the field. The
challenge is to determine when to begin irrigation so
the entire field can be irrigated before any part
becomes too dry, but satisfactory results can be
achieved with experience.

A more precise method employs tensiometers, a
sealed, water-filled tube with a vacuum gauge on the
upper end and a porous ceramic tip on the lower
end. The tensiometer is installed in the seedbed at a
depth where the majority of the roots are located. A
12-inch depth is commonly used for surface irriga-
tion, except where a hardpan exists, and there it is
placed just above this layer. Shallower settings at
about 8 inches deep are recommended for center
pivots. Two or three tensiometers per field are
recommended to avoid a problem if one of the
tensiometers quits working. Starting irrigation at a
vacuum gauge reading of 50-60 centibars on silt
loam and clay soils, and 40-50 centibars on sandier
soils, is recommended. Tensiometers are fairly
rdiableand effective when checked and maintained
properly. However, the time and effort required
usually results in most producers not being able to
use them very effectively.

Soil moisture accounting is used to calculate the
soil-water balance in the root zone throughout the
growing season. This method is sometimes called
checkbook irrigation scheduling because a record is
kept on the water that enters and leaves the soil like
an account balance is maintained in a checkbook.
Two forms of the checkbook procedure are available
through county Extension offices in Arkansas — the
Checkbook User’s Guide and the Irrigation
Scheduling Computer Program.

The Checkbook User’s Guide is used to keep a
written record of the soil moisture balance when a
computer is not available. It is a three-page handout
that shows how to use a water use chart and a water
balance table to monitor the soil moisture. The
water use chart shows an estimate of how much
water the crop uses each day based on the maximum
temperature and the age of the crop. Daily water use
and rainfall amounts are entered into a water
balance table. Maximum temperature data can be
taken from the weather, newspaper, etc., but the
rainfall should be measured with a gauge at each

LNAWAOVNVW dOud

=== New Page ===

CROP MANAG EMENT

field. Adding and subtracting these numbers in the
table determines the soil moisture deficit. Table 8.2
shows the recommended allowable deficits that are
included in the User’s Guide to help determine when
to irrigate. The allowable deficits vary depending on
the soil type, crop and irrigation method.

The Checkbook User’s Guide, water use charts
and water balance tables are available through your
county Extension office at no cost. This method does
require some record keeping, but it can be helpful in
deciding when to irrigate.

Table 8.2. Recommended Allowable Deficits -

Soybeans

. Flood, Furrow or Pivot

Predominant ae ae
Soil Border Irrigation Irrigation
(Inches) (Inches)

Clay 2.00 1.50

Silt Loam w/pan 1.75 1.25

Silt Loam wo/pan 2.50 2.00

Sandy Loam 2.25 1.75

Sandy 2.00 1.50

w/pan — with shallow (<10") restrictive layer
wo/pan — without shallow restrictive layer

If a computer is available, then the Irrigation
Scheduling Computer Program can be used for the
record keeping. This program operates much like the
Checkbook method just described except that the
computer does the calculations. It also uses local
daily maximum temperatures and rainfall measured
at the field to determine a soil moisture deficit for
the field. The program is being successfully used by
growers in Arkansas, Mississippi, Louisiana,
Tennessee and Missouri. It is also being used in
numerous irrigation studies and demonstrations
conducted in Arkansas. A three-year (1994-96)
demonstration of the program at the Southeast
Branch Experiment Station (GEBES) in Rohwer
indicated that it successfully scheduled irrigations
in a field situation very comparable to growers’
fields (Table 8.3).

In field studies using both tensiometers and the
scheduler program it was found that they are
usually within one or two days of each other on
indicating when to irrigate. However, the program is
much easier to use and maintain than tensiometers.
The program also has the option to predict when
irrigation will be needed in the next 14 days if no

Table 8.3. Inigation Scheduler Demonstation
SEBES - Rohwer, Arkansas

Avg. 1994 Avg. 1995 Avg. 1996 | Avg. 3-Yr.
Yield Yield Yield Yield
Treatment (bu/ac) (bu/ac) (bu/ac) (bu/ac)

Irrigate at:

2 inch deficit 62 63 61 62

3 inch deficit 58 57 57 57

4 inch deficit 51 52 50 51
Nonirrigated 25 16 22 21

Variety NK S59-60, emergence mid-May, furrow irrigated, 19 inch x 1,000 ft.
rows, silty clay, 0.1-0.15% slope

rainfall occurs. This offers a real benefit to
managing irrigation labor and sharing irrigation
water with other crops. The program is available
through the county Extension office.

Management Tip

+ Commitment to irrigation scheduling helps

a producer better achieve the benefits of
irrigation.

Ingaton Termination

Growers are also faced with making the decision
on when to stop irrigating soybeans. The goal is to
have adequate soil moisture to ensure that the seed
will obtain its maximum weight. Field experience
indicates that inadequate moisture for full seed
development can result in as much as 10 bu/ac yield
loss. A practical rule of thumb for terminating
irrigation is to determine if 50 percent or more of the
pods have seeds that are touching within the pod.
(The upper two pods in Figure 8.1.)

inigation termination (upper two pods) along with pods
needing at least one more inigation (lower two pods).

=== New Page ===

If there is good soil moisture at this point, then
irrigation can be ended. If the soil is becoming dry,
an additional irrigation is needed to assure
maximum seed weight. A final irrigation at this
stage should be as quick a flush as possible if flood
(levee) or border irrigating, or every other middle
with furrow irrigation. About 1 inch should be
applied with a pivot at this time, and in five to seven
days the soil moisture and crop development should
be checked again to determine if an additional
irrigation is needed.

Inigation Methods

Surface and sprinkler irrigation methods are
used on soybeans. Each method has different
characteristics that could make it the best for a
particular situation. No one method can be labeled
as the best - each has its place. The SRVP has
included the four primary soybean irrigation
methods. Table 8.4 shows that the four methods
averaged essentially the same yield over a 16-year
period.

Table 8.4. SRVP Yields by Ihigation Method

(1983-98)
Irrigation Avg. Yield Number of
Method (bu/ac) Fields
Center Pivot 47 4
Flood 46 68
Furrow 49 86
Border 51 8

Levee Inigation

Flood irrigation with levees should really be
thought of as flush irrigation. The challenge is to get
the water across the field as quickly as possible. It is
also important that irrigation is started before the
crop experiences drought. If plants are drought
stressed and then subjected to an extended wet soil
condition, plant development can be delayed and
some plants may die.

Levees should be marked early to strengthen the
commitment to pull levees and irrigate when
needed. The levee spacing depends on the slope, but
spacing on a vertical difference of 0.3 to 0.4 feet is
common. A narrower spacing on a 0.2- to 0.3-foot
vertical difference may be necessary on very flat
fields or when trying to irrigate small beans (less
than 8 inches tall). Levees are often broken in
several places or completely knocked down to get the
water into the next bay. Rebuilding the levee in time
for the next irrigation is often difficult because the
levee area tends to stay wet. Some growers install

Figure 8.2. Levee inigation with flume ditch for multiple
inlets into field.

gates or spills in the levees to avoid irrigation delays
due to rebuilding the levees between irrigations.
When possible, it is recommended that gates or
spills are also installed in the outside levee. This
provides better drainage of a field in a situation
where a rain occurs during or soon after the
irrigation.

It is recommended that water not be allowed to
stand on any area for longer than two days. This can
be difficult on big, flat fields. Some growers are able
to divide these type fields into two smaller fields
when they start irrigating so they can better
manage the water. If this isn’t practical, then
providing multiple water inlets to the field can be
helpful. Multiple inlets help avoid running water too
long at the top of the field in order to get water to
the bottom of the field. One multiple inlet method is
to water the upper half of the field from the pump
discharge or riser and then run irrigation pipe or
tubing from the discharge down the field to water
the lower half. A canal or flume ditch alongside the
field can also be used for multiple inlets. The water
can be directed from the ditch through cuts or spills
into individual bays down the length of the field.

Another possibility is to run tubing the full
length of the field and install several of the 2 1/2-
inch plastic gates in each bay. These slide gates are
adjustable from completely closed to fully open,
where they deliver 65 to 75 gpm and they are
reusable from year to year. This method is well
suited to fields that have a permanent outside levee
or road that the tubing can be laid on. However, the
heavier tubing (9 to 10 mil) has been run up and
over levees successfully as long as it is going down
slope. The 9- to 10-mil tubing is better suited for
these multiple inlet-type applications than the 6- to
7-mil tubing.

LNAWAOVNVW dOud

=== New Page ===

CROP MANAG EMENT

Management Tip

> It is recommended that water not be

allowed to stand on any area for longer
than two days.

If the soil cracks readily, then levee irrigation
becomes even more of a challenge. Multiple inlets
can help, but it is still important to irrigate on time.
Planting on a raised bed can also provide extra
drainage and help avoid some of the water manage-
ment challenges of levee irrigation.

A minimum irrigation capacity of 15 gpm per
irrigated acreis recommended for leveeirrigation. At
that rate, about four days would be required to
complete an irrigation. Starting late would increase
the time required, resulting in severe drought
stresses in the last portion to get water. The more
pumping capacity available for levee irrigation, the
better. Opportunities for getting more pumping
capacity toa field should be explored and developed
whenever possible so the pumping time required to
irrigate a field can be reduced. Although levee
irrigation presents a challenge, it can be done
successfully. There are many producers who
consistently produce high yields by paying cose
attention to the precautions and recommendations
that have been presented.

Funow Inigation

Furrow irrigation can bea very effective
irrigation method. One of the biggest requirenents
for furrow irrigation is that the field must havea
positive and continuous row grade This usually
requires precision land grading which can be rather
expensive. However, the grading results in positive
field drainage that greatly enhances production. The
row grade should be a minimum of 0.1 percent and
no more than 0.5 percent; row grades between 0.15
and 0.3 percent are especially desirable.

The row length to be furrow irrigated is another
key consideration. Row lengths of 1/4 mile or less
generally water more effectively than longer rows.
Row lengths less than 1/4 mile are usually required
if sandy soils are to be irrigated effectively.

When row lengths cannot be altered, it may be
necessary to control the furrow stream flow by
adjusting the number of rows that are irrigated at
one time. Experience shows that in most situations
it is desirable to get the water to the end of the row

in 10 hours or less. Watering much longer than this
can cause overwatering at the top of the row and
cause problems, especially if it rains and stays
cloudy soon after the irrigation. This has become
more of a concern with the expanded use of
irrigation tubing with punched holes for furrow
irrigation. The tendency with the tubing is to punch
holes as long as water still comes out of them
without much concern for how long it will take to
water out the row. This is desirable from the stand-
point of not having to plug and open holes and
operate the tubing in sets. However, the caution is to
water according to what is more effective for the
field and crop rather than what is easiest.

Figure 8.3. Furrow inigation with gated pipe.

Furrow irrigation requires a water supply of at
least 10 gpm per irrigated acre, and more capacity is
desirable if available. At 10 gpm/acre, about five to
six days should be expected to complete an
irrigation. Practices like waiting until morning to
change sets when rows water out at night can add
significantly to the time, making it difficult to finish
the field much before it is time to begin the next irri-
gation. A well-defined furrow is needed to carry the
irrigation water. Planting on a good bed is the most
desirable option for having a good water furrow. If a
bed is not used, then it is necessary to cultivate with
a furrow plow that moves enough soil from the
middle of the rows so that a good furrow is created.
Plowing out a furrow is probably not an option on
rows less than 19 inches wide, so the border method
may be a better option on those fields.

Management Tip

"7 Furrow irrigation requires a water supply of

at least 10 gpm per irrigated acre.

=== New Page ===

Some producers prefer to water alternate
middles under certain conditions. This is especially
true on row spacing of 20 to 30 inches. Watering
alternate middles can result in getting across the
field quicker and not leaving the soil as saturated as
it might be if every middle were irrigated. Then, if
rain comes soon after the irrigation, it is possible for
it to soak into the soil rather than run off or
collect and stand in low spots. However, with
alternate middles on narrow rows and/or cracking
soils, the skipped middle is sometimes saturated.

Producer preference and experience, along with
the crop and field condition, will determine whether
it is best to water every middle or alternate middles.
Alternate middle irrigation will result in having to
come back with the next irrigation somewhat sooner
than when every middle is watered if the water
doesn’t soak across the dry rows.

Furrow irrigation by necessity requires that
there be some amount of tail water runoff from the
end of the rows. All the middles will not water out at
the same rate, especially those that are wheel
middles. Also, cracking soils can make furrow
irrigation management more challenging. However,
irrigating on the appropriate schedule will reduce
the problems associated with too much cracking.

Border Inigation

This is an old irrigation method that is
relatively new in Arkansas. The concept is to flush a
large volume of water over a relatively flat field
surface in a short period of time. Borders are raised
beds or levees constructed in the direction of the
field's slope. The idea is to release water into the
area between the borders at the high end of the
field. The borders guide the water down the slope as
a shallow sheet that spreads out uniformly between
the borders.

Border irrigation is best suited for precision
graded fields that have slopein only one direction.
The soybeans need to be flat planted in the direction
of the field slope or possibly at a slight angle to the
slope. Planting across the slope tends to restrict the
water flow, especially on fields with less than 0.1 ft.
fall per 100 feet. Fields with slope in two directions
are not as well suited to border irrigation, but it may
still be possible if the borders spacing is relatively
narrow.

Border Irrigation
Source

Water
er ioe aT
Primary
Wete’
in

Slope

Min,
cos.
slope

Stop border approx
30° from end of field

Figure 8.4. Border irrigation system general layout.

The spacing between borders is dependent on
soil type, field slope, pumping capacity, field length
and field width. A clay soil that cracks is sometimes
difficult to irrigate, but with borders the cracking
actually helps as a distribution system between the
borders. This factor also makes it possible to use
borders on clay fields that have a slight side or cross
slope. The tendency on fields with side slope is for
the water to flow to the lower side and not spread
out uniformly between the borders. The soil cracks
lessen this effect because the water will spread
laterally as it follows the cracking pattern. The
border spacing on clay soil will generally be between
200 and 300 feet with the narrower spacing on fields
with side slope.

The border spacing on sandy and silt loam soils
that tend to seal or crust over is more of a challenge
than with the cracking clays. Side slope on these
soils results in the border spacing having to be
narrower in order for the water to spread uniformly
between the borders. The border spacing on these
soils will generally range between 100 and 200 feet
with the narrower spacing on fields that have side
slopes.

The pumping capacity and field dimensions
(length and width) are used to determine the
number of borders needed and how many can be
irrigated in a reasonable time. Calculations can be
made to estimate the time required to irrigate a
border, and it is usually possible to work toward
approximately 12-hour set times. The 12-hour time
set is very desirable because it fits very well for
managing water and labor. The border can be
constructed in a variety of ways and with different

LNAWAOVNVW dOud

=== New Page ===

CROP MANAG EMENT

types of equipment. The method used is partially
determined by whether or not soybeans are to be
grown on the border. A settled border height of 2 to
4 inches is all that is needed on ideal fields with no
side slope, but a 4- to 6-inch settled height is
required if the field has side slope or if the field has
potholes. If the border is constructed with a disk-type
implement, an effort must be made to fill the ditch
left at the base of the border so it will not act as a
drain furrow. The borders need to stop at least

30 feet from the low end of the field so they will not
restrict drainage.

The water can be delivered into the area
between the borders from a canal, gated pipe or
gated irrigation tubing. If irrigation tubing is used,
it is recommended that it be the heavier 9- to 10-mil
tubing. The 2 1/2-inch plastic gates that deliver 65 to
75 gpm each can be installed in the tubing, reducing
the number of holes needed and simplifying closing
gates at the end of a set.

If border irrigation can be used on a field that is
usually flood irrigated, then it can provide certain
advantages:

1. Less production area lost with border than with
levees.

2. Improved ability to irrigate small beans.

3. Don’t have to repair or rebuild border between
irrigations, thus a potential for time and labor
savings.

4. Field drainage is not restricted by borders.

5. Thereis better possibility of growing soybeans
on the border.

Border irrigation will not work on all fields and
is not necessarily a better method where soybeans
are already grown on good beds and furrow
irrigated. However, if a grower wants to move
toward flat planting and reduced tillage on these
fields, then border irrigation may be more appealing
than flood. There is not adequate space in this
publication to cover all of the details associated with
border irrigation. However, more information is
available through your local county Extension office.

Center Pivot Inigation

Center pivots offer the ability to irrigate fields
that have surface slopes that make it impossible or
impractical to irrigate with surface methods. They
also offer more water management options than
surface irrigation. The need for good surface
drainage still exists with pivot irrigation and should
not be overlooked.

Pivots are best suited for large square-,
rectangular- or circular-shaped fields free of
obstacles such as trees, fences, roads, power poles,
etc. Field ditches are also a concern if the pivot
towers must be able to cross them. Pivots can cover
a range of acreage depending on the allowable
length, but the common 1/4-mile system will cover
approximately 130 acres of a 160-acre square field.
It is also possible to tow a pivot from one field to
another. It is usually best for a system not to be towed
between more than two points during the season.

Figure 8.5. Center pivot sprinkler system.

Pivots provide the ability to control the
irrigation amount applied by adjusting the systermn’s
speed. This gives the operator advantages for
activating chemicals, watering up a crop and water-
ing small plants. These advantages are especially
important for double-crop soybeans, since they are
more likely to encounter a drought soon after plant-
ing. It is also possible to apply liquid fertilizer and
certain pesticides through the system if the
necessary precautions are taken. One of the biggest
advantages of pivot irrigation is the limited labor
required for operating the system.

=== New Page ===

It is recommended that a pivot havea water
supply of at least 5 gpm per acre that is irrigated. At
that rate, nearly four days are required to apply a
1-inch irrigation. A water supply less than this
leaves little room for breakdown time without the
risk of getting behind in meeting the crop water
needs. The capacity for a towable system should be
greater to account for the added time needed to
move the system. M ost new pivots are being
equipped with low-pressure sprinkler packages.
Many of these are mounted on drops so that the
water is released closer to the soil surface. This is
desirable as long as the system application rate is
matched to the soil and field characteristics so that
excessive runoff is avoided. If a field has a rolling
surface and a soil that tends to crust or seal over,
this should be taken into account in the sprinkler
package selection. The application amount can be
adjusted to reduce runoff to some degree, and most
producers find that applying approximately 1 inch
works best.

The biggest challenge with center pivots is the
initial cost. However, it does offer some advantages
that can justify the initial cost, especially when
surface irrigation is not possible and the cost is

spread over an expected service life of at least
15 years.

When considering the different irrigation
methods, it is important to remember that any
method that is well planned and is properly
installed, operated and maintained can give the
results desired. Every method requires time to
irrigate the whole field, so it is very important that
irrigation be started early enough that no part of the
fidd suffers moisture stress.

Arkansas Situation

Consistent and profitable soybean production is
difficult without irrigation. Fortunately, once
irrigation isin place, the energy cost for pumping
water is relatively cheap at $2 to $5 per acre for
each irrigation. This cost is easily justified by the
yield increase that can result from the irrigation.
The maximum profit usually results when the
maximum yield is obtained, so the irrigation goal is
to obtain the maximum yield by preventing crop
moisture stress. Irrigation is not a cure-all.
Maximum yield and profit will be achieved only
when irrigation is coupled with other production
practices that establish profitable yield potentials.

LNAWAOVNVW dOud