# Document 123375

DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE
Ut RESEARCH & EXTENSION
University of Arkansas System

Sherrie Smith

Arkansas Plant Health Clinic
Newsletter

Follow us on social media
Fi Facebook

Dogwood

A sample of dogwood has been confirmed with
Dogwood anthracnose in Arkansas by our Clinic
and by Dr. Mark Windham, a_ well-known
authority on the disease. This is the first
confirmation of this potentially serious disease
in our state, although it is possible that it has
been present here for some time, as it is
widespread in neighboring states.

Dogwood anthracnose, caused by the fungus
Discula destructiva, is a different disease than
Dogwood spot anthracnose, caused by the
fungus Elsinoe corni discussed in a previous
newsletter. Dogwood anthracnose is favored by
cool, wet spring and fall weather, but can occur
throughout the growing season. Symptoms
begin in the lower crown and progress up the
tree. Leaf lesions start as tan spots with purple
rims but can rapidly enlarge to large leaf
blotches. Leaves that are completely blighted
don’t fall off during autumn. The fruiting bodies
of the fungus may be observed with a hand lens
on the underside of infected leaves. Infections
progress through petioles into shoots and the
dead petioles may form a crook that resembles
fire blight. | Cankers develop, usually at leaf
scar sites, girdling and killing the shoot, while
cankers occurring on the trunk can eventually

y

Southern Plant Diagnostic Network

Issue 10-May 19, 2008

kill the tree. Water sprouts often form on the
trunk and branches where twig and branch
cankers are located. These water sprouts are
extremely vulnerable to infection. In certain
situations, it only takes 2 or 3 years for a badly
infected tree to be killed. Fortunately, good
management practices can control Dogwood
anthracnose in the landscape, but these
practices must be consistently followed to
protect trees for the long term, since native
dogwoods and neighboring trees that are not
managed may provide yearly supplies of the
fungus:

1. Carefully prune out all diseased, dying,
and dead twigs and limbs.

2. Spray all plants with a systemic foliar
fungicide labeled to control dogwood
anthracnose (examples include
fungicides containing propiconazole
(Banner Maxx) or tebuconazole (Bayer
Advanced Disease Control Products) at
bud break in the spring. Good coverage
of the entire tree with the spray is very
important.

3. About two weeks after the systemic
spray, apply a protectant fungicide
labeled to control dogwood anthracnose
containing chlorothalonil (like Daconil
products), thiophanate-methyl (Cleary's
3336 for example) or a_ product
containing both like Spectro 90 WDG.
Again, complete coverage of the entire
tree is essential. While commercial
landscape companies have power
sprayers that can effectively spray trees,
most dogwoods are small enough to

The University of Arkansas System Division of Agriculture offers all its Extension and Research programs to all eligible
persons without regard to race, color, sex, gender identity, sexual orientation, national origin, religion, age, disability,
marital or veteran status, genetic information, or any other legally protected status, and is an Affirmative Action/Equal

Opportunity Employer.

=== New Page ===

DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE
Ut RESEARCH & EXTENSION
University of Arkansas System
Sherrie Smith

allow the use of trombone tree sprayers
for homeowner use. An example is the
Trombone® Model 61224 sprayer by
Hudson Sprayer Company
http:/www.hdhudson.com/consumer-

catalog. html#61224

In addition to pruning and fungicides,
avoid overhead irrigation if possible. If
overhead irrigation must be used, water
in the early morning so that the tree can
dry out before night. It is very important
that dogwoods be watered well during
our hot summers to prevent drought
stress, which may further encourage the
disease.

Since we do not currently know how
widespread or damaging the disease is
in the state, suspect samples should be
collected and given to the local
Cooperative Extension Service office for
submission to the Plant Health Clinic for
diagnosis.

6. Resistant varieties and types of
dogwoods are available and should be
considered for new plantings or to
replace diseased trees. Refer to the
following chart for resistant cultivars.

sy

Southern Plant Diagnostic Network

Issue 10-May 19, 2008

Cornus florida

Cornus Kousa

Cornus florida

x kousa

Appalachian Big Apple Aurora
Spring

China Girl Celestial

Elizabeth Constellation

Lustgarten

Gay Head Ruth Ellen

Greensleeves Star Dust

Julian Stellar Pink

Milky Way

Steeple

Temple Jewel

Dogwood Anthracnose-Discula

destructiva

Photo by Jim Robbins, University of Arkansas

Cooperative Extension

The University of Arkansas System Division of Agriculture offers all its Extension and Research programs to all eligible
persons without regard to race, color, sex, gender identity, sexual orientation, national origin, religion, age, disability,
marital or veteran status, genetic information, or any other legally protected status, and is an Affirmative Action/Equal
Opportunity Employer.

=== New Page ===

DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE

RESEARCH & EXTENSION
University of Arkansas System

Southern Plant Diagnostic Network

Sherrie Smith Issue 10-May 19, 2008

Photo by Jim Robbins, University of Arkansas
Cooperative Extension

Dogwood Anthracnose-Discula
destructiva

Photo by Robert L. Anderson, USDA Forest Service,
Bugwood.org

The University of Arkansas System Division of Agriculture offers all its Extension and Research programs to all eligible
persons without regard to race, color, sex, gender identity, sexual orientation, national origin, religion, age, disability,
marital or veteran status, genetic information, or any other legally protected status, and is an Affirmative Action/Equal
Opportunity Employer.

=== New Page ===

sy

DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE
Off RESEARCH & EXTENSION
University of Arkansas System Southern Plant Diagnostic Network

Sherrie Smith Issue 10-May 19, 2008

Dogwood Anthracnose-Discula
destructiva

toby
Joseph O'Brien, USDA Forest Service, Bugwood.org

This bulletin from the Cooperative Extension
Plant Health Clinic (Plant Disease Clinic) is an
electronic update about diseases and other
problems observed in our lab each month.
Input from everybody interested in plants is
welcome and appreciated.

"This work is supported by the Crop Protection
and Pest Management Program [grant no.
2017-70006-27279/project accession no.
1013890] from the USDA National Institute of
Food and Agriculture."

The University of Arkansas System Division of Agriculture offers all its Extension and Research programs to all eligible
persons without regard to race, color, sex, gender identity, sexual orientation, national origin, religion, age, disability,
marital or veteran status, genetic information, or any other legally protected status, and is an Affirmative Action/Equal
Opportunity Employer.