# Document 123326

2021 Monroe County Crop Demonstrations

WOODRUFF COUNTY

yh

DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE
RESEARCH & EXTENSION

University of Arkansas System

MONROE
COUNTY
* = County Seat

NNOO 337

COUNTY

PRAIRIE

gaming

ie ae

eset UA

DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE
RESEARCH & EXTENSION
University of Arkansas System

MASTER
GARDENER

Monroe County

Diane Cunningham — Administrative Specialist III
Valerie Turner — CEA Staff Chair
Andrew Sayger — CEA Agriculture

The University of Arkansas System Division of Agriculture offers all its Extension and Research programs to all eligible
persons without regard to race, color, sex, gender identity, sexual orientation, national origin, religion, age, disability,
marital or veteran status, genetic information, or any other legally protected status, and is an Affirmative
Action/Equal Opportunity Employer.

=== New Page ===

Monroe County
Cooperative Extension Service

609 Madison St * Clarendon, AR, 72029 * 870-747-3397 * www.uada.edu

The mission of the Cooperative Extension service is to strengthen agriculture,
communities, and families by connecting trusted research to the adoption of best practices. We
not only work in agriculture, but also in 4-H youth development, Family and Consumer
Sciences, Community Development, Wildlife and Nature and much more. As county extension
agents, we take our research recommendations combined with practical advice and strive to
improve the lives of those in our communities. We work for YOU.

This demonstration booklet is tailored to the producers of Monroe County. We conduct
these demonstrations and research trials every year with a goal of helping and strengthening our
local producers and crops. As the county agriculture agent, I am here to serve you. I hope you
find the information in this report helpful to your operations. If you have any questions,
comments, suggestions or would like to discuss any information, please feel free to contact me
with the information below. Please contact me anytime throughout the year if I can help.

We would like to say a very special thank you to everyone who supports our programs.
Without constant support from producers and residents of Monroe County, it would be difficult
to conduct these programs. We are sincerely grateful, and your support does not go unnoticed.

I would also like to point out that we send out ag updates via text, email, and paper mail
throughout the year. We have a lot of contacts on these lists, and they find the information very
useful. If you would like to be on the list, contact me with the information below.

Sincerely,

Andrew Sayger

Monroe County Extension Agent — Agriculture
870-747-3397

asay ger @uada.edu

Twitter: @ ASayger

Facebook: UAEX Monroe County

=== New Page ===

Monroe County
Cooperative Extension Service

609 Madison St + Clarendon, AR, 72029 * 870-747-3397 * www.uada.edu

Table Of Contents

Zinc Source Demonstration in Rice
Soil Moisture Sensors in Corn
Corn Research Verification Program
Rice Research Verification Program
Rice IPM Multiplier
Corn Standardized County Hybrid Trial
Enlist Soybean Variety Trial
Nitrogen Source Trials in Bermudagrass Hay
Bollworm Trap Catches
Southwestern Corn Borer Trap Catches
Monroe County Crop History

Monroe County Annual Update

=== New Page ===

Monroe County
Cooperative Extension Service

609 Madison St * Clarendon, AR, 72029 * 870-747-3397 * www.uada.edu

Zinc Source Demonstration in Rice
Producer: Chad Hornsby
Agent: Andrew Sayger
Soil Instructor: Matt Fryer

Introduction

Zinc (Zn) deficiency in rice normally occurs on silt and sandy loam soils or on fields that have been precision
graded. Plant available Zn is reduced when soil pH is increased either from calcareous irrigation water, over-
liming and/or exposure to Zn deficient sub soils. Zinc fertilizer recommendations are based on soil texture, soil
test Zn less than 4.0 ppm (approximately 8 Ibs /acre), and soil pH greater than 6.0. Zinc deficiency symptoms
are typically observed shortly after flooding but can appear on seedling rice. Zinc fertilizer is recommended as a
precautionary measure on suspect soils at rates of 5-10 Ibs./acre of actual Zinc. Zinc fertilizer sources should
have a minimum of 50% water solubility for optimum effectiveness.

Background

A total of 6 demonstration sites with 3 treatments per site was established on three fields just North of Brinkley.
These fields have a history of slightly lower than average rice yields over the past few years. The majority of
management decisions such as nitrogen management, weed control, fertility practices with the exception of
Zinc, have been applied according to recommended practices by the University of Arkansas. The majority of
soil samples from these fields have a typical silt loam soil with soil test Zn in the low (1.6 - 2.5 ppm) or very
low (<1.6 ppm) categories and pH above 6.0. MESZ has been the only Zinc source used on these fields at a rate
of 1 pound of actual Zinc per acre which is well below the recommended 5-10 pounds per acre. It was suspected
that there is just enough zinc in the soil available to the plant to mask any zinc deficiency symptoms but reduce
yield potential.

Set-up

Three fields were identified according to the producer’s soil test results as fields that could benefit from Zinc
applications. The agent and Matt Fryer (Instructor in soil science for the University of Arkansas) then
established 6 demonstration sites (two sites per field) with three treatments for each site. Each treatment was a
10’x10’ square. The products used per treatment were Zinc Sulfate at 10 lb./acre, MicroMerge Zn at 10 lb//acre,
and MicroMerge Zn at 2 Ib./acre (Table 1.). The 10 Ib./acre treatment of Zinc Sulfate has been the usual
recommended application for Zinc deficiencies in the soil, MicroMerge Zn at 2 lb//acre is the typical
recommended rate per company, MicroMerge Zn at 10 lb./acre would be the equivalent of Zinc Sulfate at 10
Ib./acre. Soil samples were taken within the 10’x10’ square of each treatment prior to applying any Zinc
fertilizer source. The only exception is the “RR” fields had a blanket application of MESZ applied to the whole
field supplying 1 lb. of Zn/acre. Thus, soil test results will reflect that application in both spring and fall
analysis. Whole plant samples were taken with each treatment at midseason approximately 14 days after flood
establishment as well as a “check” sample taken outside of the treatments. The “L field” did not have whole

=== New Page ===

plant samples taken due to the flood being delayed because of well mechanical issues. At harvest, soil samples
were taken again within each treatment and a “check” taken outside of the treatments. Y-leaf tissue samples
were also taken at panicle initiation over each entire field to determine the values of Zinc concentration in the
plant.

Table 1. Product rates, zinc supplied, and costs.

Product Product Rate Actual Zn Supplied Cost
ween nn nn nese nn ence sane Ib /acre ----------------------

Control 0 0 $0

Zinc Sulfate 28 10 $26.50

MicroMerge Zinc 100 10 $90.00

MicroMerge Zinc 20 2 $18.00

Discussion Soil Data

When fertilizer is applied for any nutrient, the amount of soil test variability for that nutrient across an area
increases, therefore, soils data results for the 2 demo sites at the “RR” fields that received MESZ, will not be
included in the following information.

At demo establishment in the spring prior to Zn fertilizer being applied, soil Zn varied as much as 0.4 ppm ina
small 10ft x 40ft area. This shows that variation will only increase as the field area represented by a soil sample
increases and shows the importance of collecting a proper soil sample to accurately represent a field.

Soil Zn concentration from spring to fall in the un-fertilized check areas across fields showed a difference of -
0.1 to +0.6 ppm.

Spring to fall differences in soil Zn concentration from the 2lb Zn MicroMerge ($18/acre) application averaged
across sites showed an increase of 0.75 ppm, while the 10 lb Zinc Sulfate application ($26.50) showed an
average increase in soil test Zn of 2.5 ppm. The 10lb/acre of actual Zn application from MicroMerge ($90/acre)
increased soil test Zn from spring to fall by 3.6 ppm but at a much greater cost.

Although true statistical differences could not be calculated from our data and replicated research is needed for
sound agronomic recommendations, it would appear that Zinc Sulfate has a greater potential to increase soil Zn
levels at a more reasonable cost when compared to MicroMerge Zinc fertilizer. Regardless of which Zn
fertilizer was used for the 10 lb of actual Zn, soil test Zn levels were increased greatly by one or two soil test
categories such as from “very low” category to the “optimum” category in one growing season. The Zinc
Sulfate application would be the most economical choice. This application would usually not be applied every
year but only when soil test levels drop to low levels again.

Discussion Plant Data

Table 2 shows plant tissue Zn concentrations at midseason growth stage (approx. 14 days post flood) averaged
across the 4 of the 6 sites. Because there was difficulty flooding the field for 2 of the sites, midseason plant
samples were not taken in those locations. The whole plant samples taken at midseason in each plot (including

=== New Page ===

the check outside the plots) did not show low zinc levels near the critical Zn concentration level of 20 ppm.
Although nearly all treatments showed to be sufficient (including the checks), the Zinc Sulfate plots always
showed much higher plant Zn concentrations when compared to the plots that received the same Zn rate as
MicroMerge Zinc. Although no water solubility data is available for the MicroMerge Zinc product, Zinc Sulfate
is relatively water soluble, so the plant tissue data suggests that MicroMerge Zinc may not be as water soluble
(or plant available) as Zinc Sulfate. This is further supported with the lack of difference in tissue Zn
concentrations when comparing the untreated control to the 21b Zn and 101b Zn applied as MicroMerge Zinc in
Table 2.

Table 2. Midseason plant tissue Zn concentrations averaged across 4 locations including 2 sites where the fields
received MESZ.

Product Actual Zn supplied Cost Tissue Zn Concentration
(Ib/acre) (ppm)
Control 0 $0 28.3
Zinc Sulfate 10 $26.50 35.0
MicroMerge Zinc 10 $90.00 28.7
MicroMerge Zinc 2 $18.00 274
The y-leaf tissue samples taken later in the season at panicle initiation showed Zn levels below the critical tissue

concentrations for that growth stage of 33ppm on all fields. This was across the whole fields and not the trials.
This includes the RR field where MESZ was applied to the whole field indicating the application did not raise
soil Zn levels enough to have sufficient levels in the plant. The y-leaf tissue samples help confirm that Zn is a
limiting nutrient in these three fields. MESZ at a rate of 1 lb Zn/acre has been the only source of Zn applied to
these fields over the last few crop seasons.

Conclusion

The next step and goal for this information is to collect yield data comparing various Zn fertilizer sources.
Although we do not have yield data this year, we still see a clear picture with the information collected this year
and the years of data regarding Zn collected by the University of Arkansas System Division of Agriculture. Zinc
is a vital nutrient in rice production, and it appears to be a limiting nutrient in many of our silt loam rice soils in
Monroe County. According to this data, Zinc Sulfate at approximately $27 per acre would be the most
economical choice to build soil test Zn levels. 2 lb./acre MicroMerge Zn at $18 per acre could be a cheaper
option, but it did not raise soil test levels as high as Zinc Sulfate. It also did not appear as plant available as Zinc
Sulfate. According to the information collected, it would take a $90/acre application of 10lb/acre MicroMerge
Zn fertilizer to achieve the same results as 10lb/acre of Zinc Sulfate at $27/acre. A Zinc Sulfate application is
not meant to be applied every year. Theoretically, Zinc Sulfate would be applied 1 or 2 years to build Zn soil
levels enough to last for a “few” years. It’s hard to pinpoint exactly how many years. On another note, a foliar
Zn product will cost about the same as Zinc Sulfate but only provide a “band aide”. A foliar product would need
to be applied year after year since foliar applications barely supply the amounts of Zn needed by the plant and
do not raise soil test zinc levels. The MESZ fertilizer mentioned throughout the study is a great fertilizer when
used correctly. Although MESZ contains Zinc, it is not a Zinc fertilizer. It is a phosphorous fertilizer. MESZ is
a good option for fields that have soil test Zinc levels of medium or higher. But MESZ does not provide enough

=== New Page ===

Zinc for fields with low Zn soil test categories to be the sole source of Zn. As a final point, the goal of this
demonstration is to try to bring awareness of the importance of Zn in rice production and the importance of the
correct source of Zn. Based on the information collected, it would benefit producers to have an option of Zinc
Sulfate in Monroe County to help address these issues of low Zinc soil test in rice.

=== New Page ===

Monroe County
Cooperative Extension Service

609 Madison St * Clarendon, AR, 72029 * 870-747-3397 * www.uada.edu

Soil Moisture Sensors in Corn

Producer: RP George
Producer: Kourtney Gray
Agent: Andrew Sayger

Introduction:

Soil moisture sensing is an invaluable tool for understanding agronomic practices and improving irrigation
water management. Soil moisture sensors provide a measure of plant available water. Sensor trends can also
provide information about irrigation efficiency problems, infiltration, deep percolation, and water stress.
Sensors will not always save water or save irrigations. At times we discover that we should irrigate more often
to maximize crop potential.

We used the Watermark sensors in these field demonstrations. Sensors are placed in the root zone of the crop at
various depths such as 6”,12”,18”, and 30”. The sensors measure the soil moisture that is available to the plant
in the soil profile at the various depths. Sensors should be placed 2/3 down the row from the water source in the
soil that is most representative of the field. These sensors were manually read with a handheld device every
week or when necessary. Readings from each sensor are then averaged based on the percentage of roots at each
depth. This can easily be done by hand, but the Soil Moisture Sensor Calculator App developed by the Division
of Agriculture was used to determine these values.

Demonstrations: RP Geor ge

There were four corn fields with sensors that were monitored by the agent. The first two fields were with R. P.
and Ronnie George. The first field was located on Highway 17 north of Holly Grove. Sensors were placed in
the field near the end of May and read weekly. Sensors were placed 2/3 down the row and in the most common
soil profile which was a sandy loam. A total of 6 irrigations were triggered on this field beginning June 17" and
ending August 5". This light soil typically needed irrigating 2-3 days earlier than a silt loam. A large percentage
of roots never reached the 30” sensor depth so average readings were weighted heavily in the top 18” of soil.
Stress would occur on the plant above 70 cb on this soil type so our typical trigger point for irrigation was about
40cb at peak irrigation needs based on the amount of time it took water to get across the farm. The trigger
would vary depending on growth stage. We determined irrigation termination at 50% starch line with adequate
soil moisture. There was only .5” of water available to the crop on August 5"" with an estimated 1” needed to
finish the crop without stress. The final irrigation was initiated based on the information provided by the
sensors. Rainfall totals for the whole growing season on this field was approximately 26.9” while rainfall from
June 17 through August 5 (approximate time of irrigation needs) was 15.6”.

The second field was located with the Georges at Crossroads. Sensors were placed in the field at the desired
location about the end of May and read weekly. This field was a silt loam soil type. A total of 4 irrigations were
triggered on this field beginning June 20" and ending July 28". Readings indicated that the roots were in the top

=== New Page ===

18” of soil through June but the first reading in July showed that roots were starting to pull water from 30”.
According to the Soil Moisture Sensor Calculator app, stress would occur on the plant at 123 cb. Our trigger for
irrigations typically occurred at 80cb from emergence-tasseling, 65cb from tasseling-dent, and 90 cb from dent-
black layer. We determined irrigation termination at 50% starch line with adequate soil moisture. A reading on
August 5" indicated that there was 2.8” of moisture available in the soil profile to the plant and only 1” of
moisture was needed to finish the crop. Therefore, irrigation was terminated. Rainfall totals for the whole
growing season was approximately 30.4” while rainfall from June 20"-August 5" (approximate time of
irrigation needs) was 7.3”.

Demonstrations: Kourtney Gray

Two more demonstrations were established with Gray Farms just northwest of Roe. The first field was located
on Highway 33 and was a silt loam soil. Sensors were placed about 2/3 of the way down the row from the water
source. A total of 3 irrigations were triggered on this field from June 17" through July 15". There were two big
rain events that helped with irrigation needs at this location. The roots established early at 30” inches and used a
lot of moisture from that depth most of the season. The Soil Moisture Sensor Calculator app indicated stress
would occur at about 123cb. We initiated irrigation depending on soil moisture and growth stage of the corn.
From emergence-tasseling was 80cb, tasseling-dent was 65cb, and from dent-black layer was 90cb. We
determined irrigation termination at 50% starch line adequate soil moisture. A reading on July 28" indicated
that there was 2.5” moisture available in the soil profile and 2.2” moisture was needed to finish the crop. To be
sure another reading was taken on August 6". Sensors and the calculator indicated the crop needed 1” of
moisture to finish and there was 2” available in the soil profile. Irrigation was terminated based on these
readings. Rainfall totals for the whole growing season was approximately 27” while rainfall from May 28"-
August 6" (approximate time of irrigation needs) was 16.3”.

The second field was on Saunders Road with a silt loam soil type. Many of the details were the same as the first
field with the Gray’s. This field was planted a little later and a total of 4 irrigations was triggered from June
17"-July 28". A reading on August 6" indicated there was 1.5” moisture available in the profile. The Soil
Moisture Calculator indicated that the crop would need 1” moisture to finish the crop. Irrigation was terminated
based on this information. Rainfall for this field was the same as well.

=== New Page ===

jerizon = =
erizon F Verizon >

< Search
THA } Soil Sensor , "
Calculator Enter sensor readings in cb. &

Division of
LA Agriculture OPEN |

5.0 Effective Rooting Depth (in)
KKK KK

What's New Version History

oni Select soil type

New features include termination information

when growth stage is entered including how Allowable Depletion

much water is needed from precipitation or

irrigation. Accounts for irrigation efficiency. 30% 35% 40% 45% 50%
Enter time it takes to complete an irrigation to

get complete information about when to start

irrigating. Soybeans R8 (0.1 in/dy)

Preview Time to complete irrigation

Calculate

=== New Page ===

Monroe County
Cooperative Extension Service

609 Madison St * Clarendon, AR, 72029 * 870-747-3397 * www.uada.edu

Corn Research Verification Program

Producer: Kevin Thompson
Agent: Andrew Sayger
Coordinator: Chuck Capps

The 30-acre CRVP field was located at Fargo. The soil type in this field is a Grenada Silt Loam
and the previous crop was soybean.

After field preparation was complete, a preplant fertilizer blend of (43-93-75-23-2.3) (N-P-K-S-
Zn) was applied and bedded. On April 5 the field was planted to Dekalb 65-93 RR2 at 36,000
seeds/acre on 30” row spacing. The field emerged on April 15, with a final plant population of
33,800 plants/acre. On May 14 the grower applied Halex Gt at 3.6 pints/acre + Atrazine at 1.5
quarts/acre + Permit at 1 0z/acre for pigweed, morninglory, sickle pod and yellow nutsedge. 1
gallon/acre of chelated zinc was also applied with the herbicide due to soil test zinc levels
being in the very low category (<1.8 lbs./acre) and not having a zinc fertilizer available to apply
10 Ibs. of zinc/acre to the soil. On April 15 200 Ibs. urea + 150 Ibs. ammonium sulfate was
applied at V5. On June 16, the pre-tassel nitrogen application was made of 100 lbs./acre urea
with NBPT. Total fertilizer for the field was 212-93-75-59-3.3). Trivapro was sprayed on July 8
at 13.7 oz/acre due to southern rust. Irrigation was terminated approximately July 26 at 50%
starch line.

The field was harvested on September 3 yielding 150 bu/acre. There was estimated 30%
damage from greensnap, twisted stalks, and goosenecked stalks throughout the field that
contributed to the yield drag. Stalk samples were collected prior to harvest for nitrate testing.

The field received approximately 33.7” of rain from planting to irrigation termination.
Irrigations were determined using soil moisture sensors at 6”, 12”, 18”, and 30” along with the
irrigation scheduler and irrigated 5 times.

=== New Page ===

Monroe County
Cooperative Extension Service

609 Madison St * Clarendon, AR, 72029 * 870-747-3397 * www.uada.edu

Rice Research Verification Program

Producer: Lance Gray
Agent: Andrew Sayger
Coordinator: Ralph Mazzanti

The Monroe County furrow-irrigated rice (FIR) field was located southeast of Henderson
Corner on Hwy 49 ona silt loam soil. The field consisted of 29 acres and the previous crop
grown was soybean. The cultivar was Gemini 214 CL treated with the company’s standard seed
treatment. The field was drill-seeded at 20 lbs/acre and planted on April 6. Emergence was
observed on April 27" at 7.3 plants/sqft. According to the soil test, an (0-50-60) was applied
just before planting. 12.8 oz/acre Command + 2 oz/acre Sharpen was applied after planting on
April 7. Command at 12 oz/acre + Prowl at 33 oz/acre was applied on May 14. N-STaR
(Nitrogen Soil Test for Rice) was pulled in the spring and utilized for nitrogen
recommendations on this field. Three applications of 100 Ibs./acre of Urea + NBPT. The first
and second Urea applications was made one week apart on May 15 and May 22. The third
Urea application was made June 5 due to the field being too wet. Urea applications were
flushed in by irrigation or rainfall. Regiment + Loyant was applied by ground as a border
application only on June 1. A late boot nitrogen application was made on July 16 with 70
lbs/acre Urea. Sheath blight was present in the field but never reached levels to be a concern.
No other diseases were noted. Rice stink bugs reached above threshold and Lambda-cy + COC
was sprayed on August 6 at 2.5 oz/acre. Stink bugs reached above threshold the following
week and 1 quart Malathion + 1.8 oz/acre Lamba-cy + COC was sprayed on August 14. The
field was harvested August 31 yielding 187 bu/acre dried. Milling yield was 47/68. Total rainfall
for the growing season was 19.85 inches. Total irrigation was estimated at 30 inches.

Please refer to our uaex.uada.edu website under the farm and ranch tab. Or the Arkansas row
crops blog in early 2022 for a complete economic analysis of the Rice Research Verification
Program report.

=== New Page ===

Monroe County
Cooperative Extension Service

609 Madison St * Clarendon, AR, 72029 * 870-747-3397 * www.uada.edu

Rice IPM Multiplier
Producer: Larry Greene
Agent: Andrew Sayger
Season Review:

The two fields were contour levee and located near Keevil in Monroe County off Highway 17.
The two fields had the same management practices applied and together totaled 228 acres. The
fields are a jackport silty clay loam. After field preparation was completed, CLL16 was planted
at 80 lbs/acre on May 24" with standard seed treatment on 7.5” row spacings. At planting, 48
oz/acre Roundup power max + 16 oz/acre Command + 6 oz/acre Newpath was applied for
emerged grass and residual grass control. Emergence was observed on May 30" with a final
plant stand of 15 plants per sq/ft. 100 Ibs/acre of AMS was applied on June 17" in front of a
large rain chance. On June 23 Newpath at 6 oz/acre was applied along with the preflood
nitrogen application of 290 Ibs/acre Urea with NBPT on dry ground according to DDS0 timing.
Flood was established by June 30 and maintained. On July 28 Ultra Blazer at 4 pint/acre was
applied to control coffee bean. The GreenSeeker handheld device was used to determine if
midseason nitrogen would be necessary. Readings were taken from reference plots and then
divided by averaged readings from the rest of the field. It was determined that there was a
greater than 50% chance of response from a midseason nitrogen application. 100 lbs/acre of
Urea was applied on July 28 into the flood. Armyworms were observed through July but never
reached threshold levels to spray. Variable heading was observed on August 24. Rice stink bugs
reached threshold in September and was sprayed with Endigo ZC at 5 oz/acre with crop oil on
September 7. Fields were drained on September 22. No diseases were observed during the
growing season. The fields were harvested during the second week of October. It was estimated
the two fields averaged 150 bu/acre by measuring the grain bins.

=== New Page ===

Ui Corn Standardized County Hybrid Trials

DIVISION OF AGRIC ULTURE | n fo r mM at i O n S h eet DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE
County: Monroe Crop: Corn
Grower: Shaun Bennett

County Agent: Andrew Sayger, Robert Goodson

Location of Field: Palmer GPS: (34.6018510, -91.0802959)

Soil Type: Grenada Silt Loam, Foley Calhoun Bonn

Previous Crop: Soybean

Planting Date: = April 22, 2021

Row Width: 30"

Planting Population: 35,000

Harvest Date: September 3, 2021

Fertility: (Ib/ac) N P K iS} Zn B
-- Preplant 151 27
--- Sidedress 36 115 120 0.25 0.25
-- Pretassel 70
Total Fertility: 257 115 120 27 0.25 0.25
Irrigation Type: _ Furrow Number of Times: 5
Adj. % Plant Lodging Test
Hybrid Yield’ Area Weight Yield Moisture Stand? | Score® Weight

Pioneer P1731YHR 198.31 0.309 3,258 188.28 11.0 31,000 2 60.3
Progeny 2015VT2P 195.38 0.309 3,228 186.55 11.5 31,000 2 58.1
Dekalb 68-69 201.38 0.331 3,560 2 61
Dyna-Gro 54VC34 171.86 0.331 3,028 4 59.2
Agrigold 66-59RIB 197.53 0.331 3,488 3 60.5
Local 1307TRE 128.84 0.331 2,270 6 58.5
Pioneer 2042VYHR 179.63 0.331 3,172 2 59.8
Progeny 2118VT2P 186.38 0.331 3,280 2 60.7
Dekalb 65-99 175.30 0.331 3,092 2 59.4
Dyna-Gro 55VC80 188.01 0.331 3,320 2 59.4
Agrigold A645-16RIB 202.40 0.331 3,570 2 59.2
Local 1898TRE 212.07 0.331 3,728 201.12 10.9 34,000 1 59.9
Dekalb 70-27 215.94 0.331 3,826 206.41 11.6 33,000 1 60.7

' Yield is adjusted to 15.5% moisture.
? Plant Stand is given as plants per acre.
3 Lodging score - 1 is no lodging, 10 is completely lodged.

=== New Page ===

VA

DIVISION OF

AGRICULTURE

RESEARCH & EXTENSION

2021 Arkansas Corn Hybrid Demonstration Program

Summary

Contact: Dr. Jason Kelley, jkelley@uada.edu

Delta District Summary

UA

DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE
RESEARCH & EXTENSION
in of Arkansas System

AgriGold| AgriGold) DKC | DKC | Dyna- | Dyna Local Local Pioneer | Pioneer | Progeny| Progeny
County 645- | 6659VT2| 65-99| 68-69) Gro Gro 1307TRE| 1898TRE) 1731YHR|} 2042VYHR| 2015VT2| 2118VT2
16VT2 54VC34| 55VC80
wanes nnn n nena nnn nena nnn nen nnnen Corn Yield (Bu/Acre)---------------------------------------------
Ashley 227 216 241) 229) 223 224 227 226 206 198 208 233
Clay 222 216 215) 234) 228 231 217 213 205 222 225 238
Clay II 252 260 - - 265 269 -- -- 273 261 254 260
Cross 238 244 252) 254) 256 255 242 241 221 241 224 254
Desha 227 254 250) 240) 228 226 225 229 237 227 221 235
Desha II 220 221 233) 221) 208 190 203 222 164 180 192 209
Greene 248 261 257| 274) 263 245 264 257 254 237 250 259
Jefferson| 240 242 267) 231) 244 | 238 258 243 -- -- -- --
Lawrence} 248 276 275) 270) 255 269 266 269 246 261 252 266
Lee 208 202 228) 214) 207 197 183 206 204 191 182 225
Lee 2 235 236 238) 241) 234 | 232 223 233 240 223 228 231
Monroe | 202 198 175} 201) 172 188 129 212 198 180 195 186
Poinsett | 214 202 203) 186) 213 213 192 203 186 195 203 215
Prairie 233 229 234) 255) 198 232 215 235 217 196 217 240
White 251 265 277) 273) 267 279 272 239 275 271 279 259
Woodruff} 231 242 253) 236) 248 247 177 213 244 242 225 239
Delta 229 233 238) 238) 229 231 217 228 221 219 222 235
Average*
* Average across delta counties where all hybrids were evaluated.
The full report can be found at: https://www.uaex.uada.edu/farm-ranch/crops-commercial-horticulture/corn/

=== New Page ===

Monroe County
Cooperative Extension Service

609 Madison St * Clarendon, AR, 72029 * 870-747-3397 * www.uada.edu

Enlist Variety Trial

Crop: Soybeans Producer: Todd and Tyler Smith
Location: East of Clarendon GPS: (34.7070634, -91.1745035)
Soil Type: Foley Calhoun Bonn Row Width: 30
Previous Crop: Corn Planting Rate: 140,000
Planting Date: 6/1/21 Harvest Date: 10/23/21
Irrigation: Furrow
Pesticide Rate per Acre and Product Fertilizer (N-P-K-S-Zn)
1 Quart Roundup + 1 Quart Liberty + 1 Pint Enlist (twice) Preplant (0-100-100-0-0)

Plant Adjusted Yield % Moisture Lodging | Shatter Plot

Variety Stand k’s (Bushels/Acre)* at Harvest Score? Score? Size

acres
Stine 47E23 102 49.95 14.6 1 1 0.362
Delta Grow 47E20 108 61.31 13.9 1 1 0.362
Dyna Gro S45ES10 115 60.17 13.9 1 1 0.362
Go Soy 481E19 122 62.12 13.7 1 1 0.362
Pioneer P47T39SE 97 57.15 13.3 1 1 0.362
Delta Grow 45E10 110 63.22 13.4 1 1 0.362
Progeny P4775E36 97 58.98 13.6 1 1 0.362
Dyna Gro S46ES91 122 64.13 13.4 1 1 0.362
Stine 48EB20 110 58.47 13.0 1 1 0.362
Delta Grow 48E49 107 58.59 12.5 1 1 0.362

1 Yield adjusted to 13% moisture 21 is no lodging, 10 is completely lodged | 31= 0% 2=1-3% 3=4-8% 4=9-19% 5=20%+

These are non-replicated demonstration plots. For a better picture of a varieties potential, growers are
encouraged to compare this data with data collected from University of Arkansas System Division of
Agriculture replicated tests. This research data is printed annually and is available on-line at
http://arkansasvarietytesting.com/

Notes:

=== New Page ===

Nitrogen Source Trials in Bermudagrass Hay
Discussion:
The Nitrogen source trial demonstration was a multi-county cooperation of agents in the central to northeast
central part of the state of about nine counties. The goal was to see what nitrogen fertilizer source that is
common and available to forage producers, provided the most economical yield increase in dryland Bermuda
hay production. These were replicated four times across trials and averaged together for an overall yield. The
second cutting was lowest across all plots due to a lack of rain during that period. The harvest dates were as
follows: 1% (June 11") 2"¢ (July 9") 3" (August 13") 4" (October 13"). The first fertilizer application was
applied May 7" while the other nitrogen applications were applied after each harvest. The 4" cutting was a
simulated stockpiled Bermuda harvest or what the cows would have been allowed to harvest themselves instead
of cutting for hay.

Results Dry matter yield in pounds is shown in the table below. Urea at 60 Ibs./acre was the most economical

application or what would give you the most “bang for your buck”. Urea performed as good or better as other

nitrogen sources even when a rain did not incorporate the nitrogen within 7 days after application. Again, urea
showed to be a great choice even when rain was not expected for incorporation.

White County
Nitrogen source trial

Forage DM Yield (Ibs) per harvest

Trt # Treatment 1st 2nd 3rd 4th Total
1 Control 1537 162 658 556 2913.1
2 Ammonia nitrate - 30 lbs/a 3143 671 2266 1563 7641.7
3 Ammonia nitrate - 60 Ibs/a 3250 806 2587 1830 8472.2
4 Ammonia nitrate - 90 Ibs/a 3791 1128 2848 2126 9893.2
5 Urea - 30 Ibs/a 2686 582 2325 1516 7109.5
6 Urea - 60 Ibs/a 3546 1057 2910 2417 9930.8
7 Urea - 90 Ibs/a 3648 1230 3103 2369 10350.1
8 Urea + NBPT - 30Ibs/a 2953 635 2212 1347 7146.8
9 Urea + NBPT - 60 Ibs/a 3623 908 2930 2103 9563.8
10 Urea + NBPT - 90 |bs/a 4349 1281 3213 2242 11085.1
11 Urea + ANVOL - 30 Ibs/a 2982 661 2356 1652 7651.4
12 Urea + ANVOL - 60 Ibs/a 3622 1149 3010 2338 10118.7
13 Urea + ANVOL- 90 Ibs/a 3975 1514 3189 2575 11252.9
14 UAN - 30 |bs/a 3192 741 1840 1391 7163.1
15 UAN - 60 |bs/a 3838 1211 2299 2218 9566.5
16 UAN - 90 |bs/a 4478 1473 2739 2379 11069.2

=== New Page ===

300

Moths per Trap
a nm N N
8 3 8 i

eal
o

Monroe County
Cooperative Extension Service

609 Madison St * Clarendon, AR, 72029 * 870-747-3397 * www.uada.edu

Bollworm Trap Catches
Monroe County

21-Jun =. 28-Jun Sul 12-Jul 19-Jul 26-Jul 2-Aug 9-Aug 16-Aug 23-Aug
== Bennett-Corn —— Pettigrew Carroll Lane-Soybean =—=<=Holly Grove-Soybean
=== Roe-Soybean == Crossroads-Soybean eee Fargo-Corn
Bollworm
Location 21- 28- 5-Jul | 12- 19- 26- 2- 9- 16- 23- 30- 6-
Jun | Jun Jul Jul Jul Aug | Aug | Aug | Aug | Aug | Sep
Bennett- 0 45 30 6 155 | 27 10 0 5 0 0
Corn
Pettigrew 0 5 25 0 80 50 60 115 | 60 45 15 85
Carroll Lane- | 0 10 0 23 3 15 50 10 10 0 10 0
Soybean
Holly Grove- | 0 0 0 0 10 10 10 5 2 5 10 5
Soybean
Roe-Soybean | 0 10 5 55 265 | 45 85 35 30 10 5 30
Crossroads- | 0 5 5 20 90 30 95 55 55 35 40 70
Soybean
Fargo-Corn 0 15 20 16 32 5 20 25 5 0 0 5

=== New Page ===

Monroe County
Cooperative Extension Service

609 Madison St * Clarendon, AR, 72029 * 870-747-3397 * www.uada.edu

Southwestern Cornborer Trap Catches
Monroe County

Moths per Trap
N
oO

21-Jun 28-Jun Sul 12-Jul 19-Jul 26-Jul

= Brinkley === Carroll LN === Carroll Shop
Southwestem Comborer | 21-Jun —-28-Jun SJul 12-Jul —19-Jul. =~ 26-Jul
Brinkley | 0 0 25 38 7 3
Carroll LN | 0 0 24 19 3 9
Carroll Shop | 0 10 3 17 27 6

=== New Page ===

Monroe County
Cooperative Extension Service

609 Madison St * Clarendon, AR, 72029 * 870-747-3397 * www.uada.edu

Rice

County Acres
County Avg yield
State Acres
State Avg yield

Corn

County Acres
County Avg yield
State Acres
State Avg yield

Cotton

County Acres
County Avg yield
State Acres
State Avg yield

Soybeans
County Acres
County Avg yield
State Acres
State Avg yield

Wheat

County Acres
County Avg yield
State Acres
State Avg yield

Monroe County Crop History

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
36,000 45,900 34,000 45,900 39,304
168.4 166.6 155.3 164.8 na
1,104,000 1,422,000 1,126,000 1,441,000 1,198,000
166.4 167.1 166.2 166.6 168.8
29,000 26,500 30,600 20,600 34,789
182.1 173.2 169.6 169.7 na
595,000 645,000 735,000 605,000 830,000
183 181 175 184 183
2,712 5,260 15,400 14,100 11,091
na na 1,184 1130 na
438,000 480,000 610,000 520,000 470,000
1,177 1,133 1,185 1,200 1,226
118,500 97,100 72,000 78,200 92,892
47.2 47.3 47.7 49.6 na
3,500,000 3,210,000 2,610,000 2,780,000 3,010,000
51 50.5 49 50 50
5,500 4,900 na 1,010 4,890
63.1 59 na 61.4 na
125,000 95,000 50,000 75,000 155,000
52 55 52 55 51

Source: NASS, USDA

=== New Page ===

OO Monroe Coun VA
DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE OF AGRICULTURE
RESEARCH & EXTENSION & EXTENSION

Cooperative Extension Service University of Arkansas System

www.udex.uada.edu/counties/monroe

2020 Monroe County
Total Educational Contacts: 649,492

Total County Volunteer Hours: 2,206

Value of Volunteer Time (# of Hours X $28.54): $62,959.24

Agriculture & Natural Resources
Overview of Programs:

e 7,807 Total Educational Contacts
o 4,549 were Direct Contacts
e 823 Farm / Site Visits

e 11 On-Farm Demonstrations Irrigation Best

e 384 Volunteer Hours at a $10,959.36 Value to Management
County Practices

e 23 Master Gardeners Monroe aba

e 2 Master Gardener Projects
e 1,161 Volunteer Master Gardener hours
at a $33,134.94 value to County

CES Agent - Ano

Key Programs & Activities Conducted:
e 19 producers adopting crop best management practices representing 63,500 acres
e 27 producers adopting Integrated Pest Management practices

Monroe County 4-H

Overview of Program:
e 614,559 Total Educational Contacts
o 158,852 were Direct Contacts
25 4-H Members
3 4-H Clubs
8 4-H Volunteer Leaders
625 Volunteer Hours at a $17,837.50 Value to the County

Key Programs & Activities Conducted:
e 6 Ross Photo Contest Participants

e 2 State Camp participants

e Shooting Sports- BB Team - 8 shooters, 2 State Matches
e County Monthly Service Projects

=== New Page ===

Your DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE
University of Arkansas System

State Rice is Nice Contest 2™4 place winner (5 county participants)
State BBQ Contest Participant (5 County, 2 District)

3 Dairy Foods Contest Participants

Bass Fishing Group Started

Overview of Program:
13,856 Total Educational Contacts
o 1,845 were Direct Contacts
16 Volunteer Hours at a $456.64 Value to the County
1,430 SNAP-Ed Contacts
o 433 were Direct Contacts
12 Community Partnerships

Key Programs & Activities Conducted:
Preschool & Elementary Nutrition Education
o 416 Direct Contacts
Adult Nutrition Education
o 1,014 Contacts
Monthly FCS Newsletter
o 71 mailing list & 90 Meals on Wheels participants
ServSafe Manager Certification
o 11 Certifications Earned

Community & Economic Development
Overview of Program:
e 6,432 Total Educational Contacts
o 1,394 were Direct Contacts UA _| Strengthening

Arkansas
e 20 Volunteer Hours at a $570.80 Value to the County Communities

| comm mveamuscomncaeone HH

Key Programs & Activities Conducted:
2020 Voter Education - displays, handouts
Dissemination of information pertaining to Funding Opportunities, Tax Schools, & training
opportunities related to all aspects of Community & Economic Development
Leadership opportunities with 4-H members

ee |

Time & Effort Related to COVID-19
Overview of Program:
e 77 Agent Hours LEARN.
e 5,409 Total Educational Contacts @ DED
e Multi-County Grant funded projects
o Vaccinate with Confidence and Immunity in AR Community

o Information in English & Spanish - social media posts, displays & pamphlets Aes BINS

Lee's end this pandemic

The University of Arkansas System Division of Agriculture offers all its Extension and Research programs and services without regard to race, color, sex, gender identity, sexual orientation,
national origin, religion, age, disability, marital or veteran status, genetic information, or any other legally protected status, and is an Affirmative Action/Equal Opportunity Employer.

=== New Page ===

As Ihave mentioned, demonstration work in the county is the backbone of our
agriculture program. I want to say thank you to everyone that participated in this year’s work.
Thank you to all the state agronomist and their research crews, the verification coordinators,
state specialist, irrigation specialist, ANR educators and many more. Their help is much
appreciated to make these programs possible. Thank you to Diane Cunningham for helping
assemble the demonstration book and distributing information throughout the year.

I want to say a very special thank you to our area producers. Thank you for allowing us to
conduct research and trials on your farms. Our work would not be possible without your
assistance. I hope our work benefits you as much as you help us.

2020 Demo Cooperators

Chad Hornsby Larry Greene Derrick Young Kourtney Gray

Lance Gray Todd Smith Tyler Smith R.P. George
Kevin Thompson Jonathan Thompson Shaun Bennett Roger Bennett
Jon Carroll Jim Carroll

Thank you!!

DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE
RESEARCH & EXTENSION

University of Arkansas System

=== New Page ===