# Document 123496

CHAPTER

2

Arkansas Soybean Production Handbook

DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE
Ut RESEARCH & EXTENSION
University of Arkansas System

Soybean Growth and
Development

Larry C. Purcell, Montserrat Salmeron and Lanny Ashlock

The progenitor of soybean grows wild
throughout eastern China, Korea, Japan and the
far eastern portion of Russia. Domestication of
soybean is believed to have occurred in the Yellow
or the Yangtze River valleys of central or southern
China somewhere between 3,000 and 5,000 years
ago. There are numerous references to soybean in
some of the earliest Chinese literature.

An important characteristic of soybean is that it
is a legume and forms a symbiotic relationship with
Bradyrhizobium japonicum (commonly referred to
as rhizobia) bacteria that results in nodules forming
on the roots (Figure 2-1). These nodules reduce
atmospheric nitrogen gas to a form that the plant can
utilize. A major advantage of soybean is that because
of nitrogen fixation, it does not require any nitrogen
fertilizer.

Figure 2-1. A well-nodulated root system of a young
soybean plant.

A second important characteristic of soybean that
has important implications for crop management is
that it is a short-day plant. That is, soybean is
triggered to flower as the day length decreases below
some critical value. These critical values differ among
maturity groups (MGs). Both nitrogen fixation and

UPDATED 4-2014

the response of soybean to day length are discussed
with regard to their importance on crop management
in more detail later in this chapter.

Seed

Soybean seeds are living organisms and should
be treated with care. Avoid unnecessary dropping of
seed through augers and conveyers as this can
damage the seed coat. Also, seed should be kept in a
cool, dry environment to preserve seed quality and
vigor. Hot and humid conditions can result in rapid
deterioration of seed quality, which can decrease seed
germination especially under stressful conditions.

Soybean seeds vary in shape but are generally
oval. A soybean seed consists of a large embryo
enclosed by the seed coat. There are large variations
in seed coat color (light yellow, green, brown, black,
mottled), but commercial soybean is nearly always
yellow. The embryo is comprised of two cotyledons
(Figure 2-2), which upon germination produce a
plumule with two simple leaves (unifoliate leaves)
and a hypocotyl (which is green or purple depending
upon whether the variety produces white or purple

hilum

micropyle

hypocotyl

Figure 2-2. A mature soybean seed.

=== New Page ===

flowers). The embryo also consists of the radicle
(root). The hilum (seed scar) is easily visible on the
surface of the seed coat and is classified by color (ie.,
black, imperfect black, brown, buff and clear). The
micropyle is a very small hole located near the hilum
that is formed during seed development. The
micropyle accounts for nearly all of the gaseous
exchange between the seed and its environment,
whereas water can be absorbed through the entire
seed coat surface.

Germination and Seedling
Establishment

The soybean crop has a wide planting window,
typically from early spring, after the danger of frost
has passed, until mid- to late-June. The trends for
soybean production in Arkansas in recent years are
for planting to occur earlier each year. On average,
since 1985, planting has occurred one day earlier
each year (Figure 2-3). In conjunction with earlier
planting, the average soybean harvest date has also
been about one day earlier each year. The combina-
tion of early planting and early maturity has advan-
tages for avoiding late-season drought and disease
and insect pressure. The predominant MGs grown in
Arkansas today are 4 and 5, whereas MGs 5, 6 and 7
were predominant prior to 1985.

Soybean seed is typically planted at a depth of
about | inch. Many seed companies provide fungi-
cide and insecticide treatments on their seed, which
can be especially beneficial to soybeans emerging and
growing slowly in early spring due to cool tempera-
tures. In fields where soybeans have not been grown
in 3 or more years, a rhizobium inoculant (specific
for soybeans, Bradyrhizobium japonicum) should be
applied as a seed treatment or in furrow at planting.
There is little supporting research to show that
inoculation improves yield in fields where soybeans
have been grown in recent years.

High-quality seed requires three appropriate
conditions for germination — soil moisture, tempera-
ture and oxygen. Provided that the soil is not
saturated, oxygen concentration is not a limitation,
but germination will not occur in flooded soil due
to lack of oxygen. Within 24 hours of planting,
assuming that soil moisture is adequate, seed size
doubles and seed moisture content increases up to
50%. During this time period, proteins become active
and respiration increases. Respiration is temperature
sensitive and requires oxygen, and germination rates
range from 2 weeks or more in cold soil (50°F or
less) to about 4 days under optimum soil tempera-
tures (82° to 85°F).

Figure 2-3. The date when 50% of Arkansas soybeans
were (a) planted and (b) harvested from 1985 to 2008.
Data compiled from statewide averages of the Crop
Reporting Service.

6/18

6/8

5/29

Date

5/19

y=-1.0478x + 2242.3
R? = 0.6018

5/9

4/29
1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010

11/10

11/5

10/31

10/26

10/21

Date

10/16

y= -1.1166x + 2525.8
R? = 0.6648 °

10/11

10/6

10/1
1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010

The radical (root) is the first structure to emerge
rom the germinating seed, usually within 48 hours
of planting under optimum conditions. The radical
grows downward rapidly and can provide moisture
to the germinating seed if the soil surrounding the
seed becomes dry. If a seed begins to germinate and
the soil dries around the radical before it reaches soil
moisture, the seed will most likely die.

The hypocotyl is the seedling structure that
emerges from the soil surface (Figure 2-4a). The
hypocotyl is either greenish or purplish in color
reflecting differences in white or purple flowers that
will be evident later in the season. As the hypocotyl
emerges from the soil, it forms a crook as it pulls the
cotyledons from the soil (Figure 2-4b). This is a criti-
cal stage in seedling emergence. In a crusted soil, the
hypocotyl may be unable to push through the soil
surface, resulting in a swollen hypocotyl, or the
cotyledons may break from the hypocotyls, leaving

UPDATED 4-2014

=== New Page ===

Figure 2-4a. Stages of soybean germination, emergence
and seedling establishment. (Drawing by Chris Meux)

Unifoliate
leaves

otyledons
Cotyledons 2S yl

Hypocotyl

Radicle

Figure 2-4b. Different stages of seedling emergence in
the same field at the same time. The two soybean
seedlings on the left have swollen hypocotyls due to a
crusted soil surface. The two seedlings in the middle
emerged normally in an area without crusting. The
hypocotyl of the two seedlings on the far right has
straightened and the cotyledons are beginning to
unfold. (Photo by Ryan J. Van Roekel)

the cotyledons and terminal beneath the soil. Under
these conditions, crust-busting equipment such as a
rotary hoe may be able to fracture the soil crust and
improve seedling emergence.

Once through the soil surface, the cotyledons
unfold, synthesize chlorophyll and begin to photo-
synthesize. The cotyledons are rich in protein and oil
and are the primary source of nutrients for the devel-
oping seedling for the first 7 to 10 days. Once the
cotyledons are through the soil surface, the plant is
said to be at the VE stage of development.

Two unifoliate leaves emerge opposite from
one another on the main stem as the cotyledons
unfold and expand. Once cotyledons and the edges
of the unifoliate leaves are not touching (leaf
unrolled), the plant is considered to be in the
VC development stage.

UPDATED 4-2014

Germination Management Tips

@ An example of the effect upon yield due to
the loss of various plant parts during seedling
development is as follows: the loss of cotyledons
at VC is around 8% to 9%; the loss of the unifoli-
ate leaves plus cotyledons at V1 is around 7%.

@ Consider using fungicide and insecticide seed
treatments, especially when planting in cool soils.

Vegetative and
Root Development

Once the unifoliate leaves are fully expanded,
the plant is described as being at the V1 stage of
development. To determine when a leaf is fully
expanded, examine the young leaf at a node above.
If the edges of the leaf at the node above the leaf in
question are not touching, the leaf at the node below
can be considered fully expanded and that node is
counted. For example, Figure 2-5 illustrates a soy-
bean plant with unifoliate leaves and with two trifoli-
ate leaves. In this figure, the edges of the young
developing trifoliate are not touching. Therefore,
the unifoliate node is counted and the first trifoliate
node is counted, and the plant is at V2.

Figure 2-5. Vegetative structures of a young soybean
plant. (Drawing by Chris Meux)

Growing point

(meristem)
Trifoliate leaf

Unifoliate,

leaves Axillary
buds

Cotyledonary
node

Lateral roots

Branched
taproot

=== New Page ===

The nodes above the unifoliate leaves have
trifoliate leaves, and vegetative development is identi-
fied from V2 (the node with the first trifoliate leaf) to
the topmost node of the plant (Vn, Table 2-1). Trifo-
liate leaves are arranged in an alternate pattern up
the stem. When temperatures are warm and soil
moisture is adequate, new nodes will appear about
every 4 days. Cool temperatures and drought can
slow and even halt node and leaf development. The
time required to reach full canopy closure decreases
as rows are narrowed and populations increased,
resulting in a crop more competitive against weeds.

Under good environmental conditions, the root
depth increases faster than shoot height during the
vegetative development phase, but the dry weight of
the aboveground parts exceed the root dry weight. By
V3, small root nodules are usually visible on the
main root, but if there is substantial carryover of N in
the soil, nodule development may be delayed. Three
to four weeks after emergence, nodules begin provid-
ing nitrogen to the plant. A nodule continues to
increase in size until it is about 8 weeks old, and
after this, it loses activity. As nodules die and lose
activity, new nodules are formed, often on branch
roots, and provide a continued N supply throughout
seed fill. Active nodules have a dark reddish color on
the inside, whereas inactive nodules are black, gray
or greenish on the inside (Figure 2-6).

Both root and vegetative development depend on

a good environment such as adequate soil moisture
and nutrition (including adequate nodulation for
nitrogen fixation) and the absence of high levels of
disease and nematode infection. During vegetative
development, roots can grow 0.5 to 0.75 inch per
day. Figure 2-5 depicts above- and below-ground
vegetative development of a young soybean plant.

Management Tips

@ At full growth, more than 80% of the roots are in
the upper 4 inches of soil with a restrictive pan.
This creates a situation in which deep cultivation
(root pruning) or drought may reduce yields and
increase the need to maintain adequate soil
moisture (irrigation).

@ Decreasing row spacing to 20 inches or less
results in faster canopy coverage and lessens the
dependence on post-emergence herbicides.

Growth Habit

The growth habit of soybeans is described as
being either determinate or indeterminate. Tradition-
ally, determinate varieties have been from MGs 5
to 10 and indeterminate varieties have been from
MGs 000 to 4. In more recent years, however, this
division has become less distinct, and there are
numerous MG 4 varieties that are determinate and
MG 5 varieties that are indeterminate.

Determinate soybean varieties stop vegetative
growth and producing nodes on the main stem soon
after flowering starts, whereas indeterminate varieties
continue producing nodes on the main stem until the
beginning of seed fill (growth stage R5). Determinate
varieties, however, will continue producing nodes on
branches until the beginning of seed fill. While deter-
minate varieties have a relatively short flowering
period of nodes on the main stem (~3 weeks), the
entire flowering period when including branches is
similar to indeterminate varieties of the same matu-
rity. The total length of the flowering period will
depend upon planting date and maturity but may
range from 3 to 6 weeks.

Figure 2-6. Cross section of soybean nodules (a) actively fixing nitrogen, (b) beginning to senesce and lose nitrogen
fixation activity and (c) senescent. Note that the active nodule has a deep red color compared to the gray and dark
green color of the senescent nodule.

UPDATED 4-2014

=== New Page ===

Determinate varieties are characterized as having
a terminal raceme that results in a cluster of pods
under good growing conditions at the uppermost
main stem node. Under stressful conditions, some or
all of the pods may abort and the terminal raceme
appears as a notched spine at the top of the plant.
Determinate varieties also typically have leaves at the
topmost three or four nodes that are similar in size.
In contrast, indeterminate varieties lack a terminal
raceme, and the nodes at the top of the plant tend to
form a zigzag pattern. Leaves of indeterminate vari-
eties progressively decrease in size beginning at about
the fifth node from the top to the plant's terminal.

Table 2-1. Description of vegetative stages.

Abbreviated

Stage Title Description

Cotyledons above the soil
surface

Emergence

Unifoliate leaves unrolled
sufficiently so that the leaf
edges are not touching

Cotyledon

First node Fully developed leaves at

unifoliate node

Second node _ | Fully developed trifoliate leaf
at node above the unifoliate

node

Third node Three nodes on the main
stem with fully developed
leaves beginning with the

unifoliate node

n number of nodes on the main
stem with fully developed
leaves beginning with the
unifoliate node

Reproductive Development

When a soybean plant begins to flower, it is
classified as being in a reproductive (R) growth stage.
Each reproductive stage from flowering until matu-
rity is designated in the reproductive growth stage
scheme as indicated in Table 2-2. The length of time
for plant development (both vegetative and reproduc-
tive) varies depending on several factors including
temperature, MG and day length. The main effect of
day length on soybean development is that of floral
induction. Soybeans are referred to as short-day
plants because short days (i.e., long nights or dark
periods) initiate flowering (floral induction).

Reproductive stages are based on flowering,
pod development, seed development and plant
maturation. Each stage description is given a repro-
ductive stage (R) number and an abbreviated title
(Table 2-2).

UPDATED 4-2014

Table 2-2. Description of reproductive stages.

Stage | Abbreviated
No. Stage Title

R1 Beginning
bloom

R2 Full bloom

Description

One open flower at any node
on the main stem

Open flower at one of the
two uppermost nodes on
the main stem with a fully
developed leaf

R3 Beginning Pod 3/16 inch long at one of the

pod four uppermost nodes on the
main stem with a fully devel-
oped leaf
R4 Full pod Pod 3/4 inch long at one of

the four uppermost nodes on
the main stem with a fully
developed leaf

R5 Beginning Seed 1/8 inch long in a pod at
seed one of the four uppermost
nodes in the main stem with a
fully developed leaf

R6 Full seed Pod containing a green seed
that fills the pod cavity at one of
the four uppermost nodes on
the main stem with a fully

developed leaf.

R7 Beginning
maturity

One normal pod on the main
stem that has reached its
mature pod color

R8 Full maturity | 95% of the pods have reached
their mature pod color; 5-10
days of drying weather are
required after R8 before the
soybeans have less than 15%

moisture

The main stem is used for determining reproduc-
tive stages. When the main stem of a plant is broken
or cut off, reproductive development on the new
branches may be retarded. Plants that have intact
main stems are used to determine stage development.

The RI stage begins when there is one flower at
any node on the plant. Usually the first flower is
located between the fourth and sixth nodes. The R2
stage occurs when there are open flowers at one of
the two uppermost nodes. Between RI and R2, open
flowers appear at nodes from the bottom of the plant
toward the top. In a late-planted soybean crop (e.g.,
double-crop soybeans), Rl and R2 may occur almost
simultaneously or be separated by as much as 6 days.
For full-season soybeans (e.g., MG 5 variety planted
in early May), the time period between R1 and R2
ranges between 3 and 10 days.

=== New Page ===

After flowering begins, plants continue to grow
vegetatively, producing new nodes on both the main
stem and branches. The time between R2 and begin-
ning pod stage (R3) depends upon planting date,
growth habit (determinate or indeterminate), MG,
temperature and other factors that affect plant growth
(e.g., drought). Indeterminate varieties may spend
2 or more weeks at R2 because new nodes are
produced on the main stem after first reaching R2.

The beginning of the seed fill period is desig-
nated as R5. At this time, seed are 1/8-inch long in
ull-size pods at one of the uppermost four nodes.
Flowering ends and plants reach their maximum
vegetative weight at the beginning of R5. During the
owering and early pod formation stages (R1 through
R4), plants adjust the number of flowers and young
pods in response to the environment. Flowers and
young pods may abort when conditions are stressful
‘or a few days, but then fewer flowers and young
pods may abort later if environmental conditions
improve. Soon after plants reach R5, however, there
is little pod abortion, and stress (e.g., drought, pro-
onged flooding, etc.) results in a short seed-filling
period, early maturity and small seed.

The R5 development stage ends and the RO
development stage begins when the seed fills the pod
cavity from a pod at one of the uppermost four nodes
on the main stem. Because much of seed dry weight
accumulates during R6, it is critical to ensure that the
crop continues to be managed for irrigation and
pests. Toward the end of R6, the canopy begins to
yellow and leaves begin to senesce.

The R7 development stage begins when there is
one mature-color pod at any node on the plant.
Mature pod color in soybeans differs among varieties.
The pod wall color in commercial varieties is usually
tan but may be brown. Additionally, the pubescence
(small hair-like structures on the plant) of varieties
may be either gray or tawny (brown). The mature
pod color of soybeans, therefore, varies from light
gray to dark brown. At R7, seed moisture is still high,
but the seed has reached its maximum dry weight.
Seeds can still be damaged by stinkbugs at this stage.
The R7 stage is also referred to as physiological
maturity. Once 95% of the pods turn a mature pod
color, the plant has reached R8 and can be harvested
once seed moisture is less than 15%.

Management Tips

@ Having a full canopy by R2 is important in setting
a maximum number of pods.

@ Begin scouting soybeans regularly for diseases
and pod-feeding insects (especially bollworms
and stinkbugs) beginning at R3 and continuing
through seed fill.

Irrigation should be continued at least until the
crop is in the R6 development stage. If soil mois-
ture is high when leaves first begin to turn yellow,
irrigation can be terminated.

Days Between Growth Stages

Soybean development is influenced by tempera-
ture and day length and will also be affected by soil
moisture conditions, plant nutrition and other
factors. The number of days between stages will also
vary greatly depending on the MG and variety used.
Therefore, the timing of development stages will be
different depending on the variety, climate and plant-
ing dates.

Emergence will depend primarily on temperature
under correct moisture conditions. Plants will emerge
when soil temperatures are higher than 41°F and
higher temperatures will enhance a faster emergence.
For instance, emergence can take about 14 days at
46°F but only 4 days at 59°F During the vegetative
period, the plant will produce nodes at an average
rate of 1 node every 4 days. The total number of
nodes will vary between approximately 16 and 23,
depending on the cultivar and length of the vegeta-
tive period.

The beginning of flowering and subsequent
reproductive development is greatly affected by
photoperiod. The soybean is a short-day plant, mean-
ing that days shorter than a critical value will induce
the plant to flower. Figure 2-7 shows the day length
across the growing season for Dumas (33.8° latitude),
Stuttgart (34.5° latitude) and Blytheville (35.9°
latitude), Arkansas. The yellow-shaded region near
the bottom of the figures show the critical day length
at which the development rate toward flowering is
at a maximum. For MG 3 varieties, the critical day
length that induces soybeans to flower at a maximum

UPDATED 4-2014

=== New Page ===

Figure 2-7. Day length versus date for three locations in Arkansas. The yellow-shaded regions indicate the day
lengths that result in MG 3 (left panel) and MG 5 (right panel) varieties’ rapid progression toward flowering.
As the day length becomes longer (green region), the rate of progression toward flowering decreases.

16

Day length (h)

12
Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct

(5 Induction to flowering and development towards
reproductive stages at a maximum rate

rate is about 13.4 hours, whereas for a MG 5 variety,
the critical day length is about 12.8 hours. When day
length is longer than these critical values, plants will
continue to be induced to flower but at a progres-
sively slower rate (green region in Figure 2-7).

For example, a MG 3 variety will be induced to
flower at a maximum rate whenever the day length is
less than 13.4 hours, which corresponds to dates ear-
lier than April 1 (Figure 2-7). For a MG 5 variety,
plants will be induced to flower at a maximum rate
whenever the day length is less than 12.8 hours,
which corresponds to dates earlier than March 15
(Figure 2-7). Note that if planting is delayed until
mid-May, the photoperiod is longer than the critical
day length for both MG 3 and 5 varieties (green
region of Figure 2-7), which means that the progress
toward flowering will take considerably longer. For
double-crop or late-planted soybeans (late June or
early July), the day length is shorter each day, which
means that the development rate toward flowering
is increasing. From a practical standpoint, these
scenarios mean that early-planted or late-planted
soybeans should be planted in more narrow rows
(< 20 inches or twin rows) and at a higher popula-
tion density than soybeans planted in mid-May.
Likewise, MG 3 and early MG 4 soybean varieties
will have less time for vegetative growth compared to
MG 5 varieties, which may require more narrow rows
and a higher population density.

UPDATED 4-2014

16

15

14

13

12
Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct

(5 Development towards reproductive stages

at a slowed rate

In addition to photoperiod, higher temperatures
will accelerate reproductive development. Using
long-term weather data for Blytheville and Dumas,
Arkansas, we have estimated dates when flowering
(RI), beginning seed fill (R5) and physiological
maturity (R7) are expected to occur over a range of
planting dates using a computer simulation model
(CropGro, Figure 2-8). Assuming average tempera-
tures for early plantings on March 15, the time from
planting to flowering (averaged across the two loca-
tions) will be about 60 (May 14) and 70 (May 24)
days for MG 4 and 5 varieties, respectively. As plant-
ing date is delayed, the number of days to flowering
is shortened. For instance, with late planting on
June 15, the number of days from planting to flower-
ing will be about 42 (July 27) and 50 (August 14)
days for MG 4 and 5 varieties, respectively. The
development rate toward flowering and the subse-
quent reproductive stages will be faster in years
with higher temperatures and/or locations in
south Arkansas.

The beginning of seed filling, or the R5 stage,
will occur about 27 (June 10) and 39 (July 2) days
after beginning of flowering for MG 4 and 5 varieties
planted on March 15, but it will shorten to 21
(August 17) and 23 (August 27) days for MG 4
and 5 varieties when planted on June 15.

=== New Page ===

Figure 2-8. Estimated dates of beginning flowering (R1), beginning seed filling (R5) and physiological maturity (R7)
based upon planting date for MG IV and V soybeans. The lower edge of each colored region represents dates for
Dumas, AR (latitude 33.8°N), and the upper edge represents estimates for Blytheville, AR (latitude 35.9°N). Estimates
were made using a crop simulation model (CropGro) and using long-term weather data for each location.

01 Oct
n
& 01 Sep
£
oO ‘
e Blytheville 35.9 °N
3 01 Aug Dumas 33.8 °N
Ej
no]
°
-
S 01 Jul
-
-
fo}
£
@ O1Jun
Qa

01 May

15 Mar 15 Apr 15 May

Planting date

15 Jun

01 Oct ev

01 Sep

01 Aug

01 Jul

01 Jun

01 May
15 Mar 15 Apr 15 May 15 Jun

Planting date

@ Beginning flowering (R1) Sm Beginning seed filling (R5) Ml Physiological maturity (R7)

Finally, the expected number of days from begin-
ning of seed filling to physiological maturity (R7) will
be about 67 (August 16) and 61 (September 1) days
for MG 4 and 5 varieties with an early planting on
March 15, and the R7 date is expected to be about
34 (September 20) and 32 (September 28) days after
R5 for MG 4 and 5 varieties with a planting date in
mid-June.

The number of days from R7 until all the pods
are mature and the crop is ready to harvest (R8) can
range from 6 to 13 days depending on the cultivar

and weather conditions. Under non-irrigated
conditions or dry years, the soybean crop can reach
maturity about 7 to 10 days earlier than the reported
expected dates. Conditions of prolonged drought
during flowering through early seed fill (R5) followed
by favorable growing conditions may result in few
pods on the plant, a delay in maturity, and green
leaves and stems when pods are mature. Likewise,
insect infestations resulting in a large loss of pods can
also delay maturity and result in green leaves and
stems when pods are mature.

UPDATED 4-2014