# Document 123408

DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE
Ut RESEARCH & EXTENSION
University of Arkansas System

Sherrie Smith

Arkansas Plant Health Clinic
Newsletter

Follow us on social media

fi Facebook

Citrus

Citrus Canker, caused by the bacterium
Xanthomonas axonopodis pv. citri (Xac) has
NOT been found in Arkansas. It has, however,
been identified in nearby states. The disease
was first found in Florida in 1910. By 1933, the
disease was eradicated. Fifty-three years later
in 1986, Citrus Canker was once more identified
in Florida. In 1994 eradication was declared. In
1995 Citrus Canker was detected for the third
time in Florida. A Florida wide mandatory
eradication with the 1,900-foot rule was
implemented in 2000. All citrus within 1900 feet
of an infected tree had to be removed. Since
then, the disease has spread throughout the
Gulf States and up the Atlantic coast to South
Carolina. Realizing the disease had become
too widespread for eradication to be effective;
USDA stopped funding the eradication program
in 2006. A statewide quarantine remains in
effect. The purpose of this article is to inform
readers of the signs and symptoms of this
serious disease. Although Arkansas is not a
citrus producing state, citrus species are kept in
homes and greenhouses across the state.
Citrus Canker causes stem, leaves, and fruit
lesions, resulting in defoliation, shoot dieback,
and fruit drop. Fruit that doesn’t drop

y

Southern Plant Diagnostic Network

Issue 2-March 16, 2012

prematurely is disfigured and rendered
unmarketable. Many species, cultivars, and
hybrids of citrus and citrus relatives including
orange, grapefruit, pummelo, mandarin, lemon,
lime, tangerine, tangelo, sour orange, rough
lemon, calamondin, trifoliate orange, and
kumquat are susceptible. Grapefruit and
Mexican lime are very susceptible. Early
oranges such as Navel, Pineapple, and
Hamlin, as well as lemons and limes are
moderately susceptible. Mid-season oranges
such as Valencia, tangor, and tangelo, as well
as other tangerine hybrids are less susceptible.
Tangerines are tolerant. Symptoms are lesions
or pustules on leaves, twigs, and stems that
begin as raised areas. The pustules become
corky with age, and crater-like with sunken
centers surrounded by a yellow halo. Lesions
on the leaves are found on both sides of the
leaf. New growth is most susceptible to
infection. Leaves are rendered much more
susceptible for longer periods when infested
with leafminer. Fruit cankers appear scab-like
and corky without the yellow halo. The fruit of
oranges and tangerines are susceptible during
the first 60-90 days after petal fall, and
grapefruit for 120 days. Wind driven rain is the
primary means of spread. The bacteria enter
through stomates, or wounds made by thorns,
insects, or storm damage. Citrus Canker can
also be spread from tree to tree or to a different
location on hands, clothes, and equipment.
Once the disease is firmly entrenched in a
production area, control consists of good
sanitation, windbreaks to limit windblown
inoculum, leafminer control, and frequent
application of copper sprays for 90 days after
petal fall.

The University of Arkansas System Division of Agriculture offers all its Extension and Research programs to all eligible
persons without regard to race, color, sex, gender identity, sexual orientation, national origin, religion, age, disability,
marital or veteran status, genetic information, or any other legally protected status, and is an Affirmative Action/Equal

Opportunity Employer.

=== New Page ===

DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE
Ut RESEARCH & EXTENSION
University of Arkansas System

Southern Plant Diagnostic Network

Sherrie Smith Issue 2-March 16, 2012
(Copied from USDA) Lemon Citrus Canker-Xanthomonas
e Florida is currently under a statewide axonopodis pv. citri (Xac

quarantine by the USDA and no citrus
may leave the state unless the USDA has
issued a limited permit. No Florida grown
citrus may enter any citrus producing
states or territories. No citrus plants or
parts may enter or exit Florida.

e Citrus producing states and territories
include American Samoa, Arizona,
California, Guam, Hawaii, Louisiana, the
Northern Mariana Islands, Puerto Rico,
Texas, and the U.S. Virgin Islands

e This restriction includes dooryard citrus.
No citrus grown in residential areas may
be shipped out of state without a limited
permit. At this time, there is no
mechanism in place for certifying
dooryard citrus.

e There are no restrictions on the
movement of citrus within Florida,
commercial or dooryard.

Photo by Sherrie Smith, University of Arkansas
Cooperative Extension

Swiss Chard

Swiss Chard (Beta vulgaris var. cicla) is a
member of the beet family. It is one of the
healthiest vegetables available, and a valuable
addition to a healthy diet. The leaves can be

The University of Arkansas System Division of Agriculture offers all its Extension and Research programs to all eligible
persons without regard to race, color, sex, gender identity, sexual orientation, national origin, religion, age, disability,
marital or veteran status, genetic information, or any other legally protected status, and is an Affirmative Action/Equal
Opportunity Employer.

=== New Page ===

DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE
Ut RESEARCH & EXTENSION
University of Arkansas System

Sherrie Smith

eaten raw in salads or as a cooked green. The
stalks are also edible. However, the white
stalked varieties are tenderer than the red
stalked varieties. Since chard is a member of
the beet family, it is susceptible to the same
diseases as beet crops. Bacterial Leaf Spot,
caused by Pseudomonas spp, can be seed
borne or enter the leaves through hydathodes or
wounds. Symptoms may begin as tiny water-
soaked spots that later enlarge to circular to
ellipsoid, tan spots that are 3-8mm in diameter
with distinct brown to black borders. There are
currently no chemical controls for Bacterial Leaf
Spot of Swiss chard. Growers should avoid
working in the field or garden when the foliage
is wet and avoid overhead irrigation. The use of
clean seed is thought to help limit losses.

Swiss Chard Bacterial Spot-

Pseudomonas spp.

a)
Photo by Sherrie Smith, University of Arkansas
Cooperative Extension

bey
Southern Plant Diagnostic Network

Issue 2-March 16, 2012

Forsythia

With its bright yellow blooms, Forsythia is a
cheerful reminder that spring is here. Forsythia
has few disease problems, but they are
susceptible to Phomopsis Gall. Species of the
fungus Phomopsis can also cause galls on
maple, hickory, fig, gardenia, jasmine, privet,
oak, rhododendron, elm, viburnum, and others.
On forsythia, tight globular clusters, % inch to
more than an inch in diameter may be found
singly, or in clusters along stems and twigs.
Twig dieback may occur when galls are
numerous. Chemicals are largely ineffective
against established Phomopsis Gall. Control
consists of pruning out the galls and removing
them from the planting. In severe cases the
entire shrub may be pruned to the ground.

Forsythia Phomopsis Gall-
Phomopsis spp.

= * fe

‘a ie is
Photo by Sherrie Smith, Universit:
Cooperative Extension

'y of Arkansas

The University of Arkansas System Division of Agriculture offers all its Extension and Research programs to all eligible
persons without regard to race, color, sex, gender identity, sexual orientation, national origin, religion, age, disability,
marital or veteran status, genetic information, or any other legally protected status, and is an Affirmative Action/Equal

Opportunity Employer.

=== New Page ===

DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE
RESEARCH & EXTENSION
University of Arkansas System

Sherrie Smith

Forsythia Phomopsis Gall-
Phomopsis spp.

Photo by Sherrie Smith, University of Arkansas
Cooperative Extension

Basil

Basil is the most popular herb grown in America.
Downy Mildew of basil, caused by Peronospora
belbahrii, is a serious disease of basil that can
move rapidly through a crop. Basil Downy
Mildew was first detected in the United States in
Florida in 2007 and has since spread to other
parts of the country. Symptoms are yellowing

Pe,
Southern Plant Diagnostic Network

Issue 2-March 16, 2012

between the veins on the upper side of the
leaves. The yellowing is sometimes mistaken
for nutritional issues or insect damage. Grayish
dark sporulation occurs on the underside of the
leaves. As the disease progresses, leaf
margins may become blackened with leaves
eventually dying. This disease is favored by
environmental conditions such as prolonged
leaf wetness, high relative humidity, overhead
irrigation, and close spacing. Spores are easily
spread by splashing water, wind, or through
handling. Downy Mildew can survive in plant
debris, seeds, or weed hosts. Fungicides
labeled for control of Downy Mildew on herbs
are Actinovate AG, Trilogy, OxiDate, ProPhyt,
Fosphite, and K-Phite.

Basil Downy Mildew-Peronospora
belbahrii

Photo by Sherrie Smith, University of Arkansas
Cooperative Extension

The University of Arkansas System Division of Agriculture offers all its Extension and Research programs to all eligible
persons without regard to race, color, sex, gender identity, sexual orientation, national origin, religion, age, disability,
marital or veteran status, genetic information, or any other legally protected status, and is an Affirmative Action/Equal

Opportunity Employer.

=== New Page ===

vy

DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE
Off RESEARCH & EXTENSION
University of Arkansas System Southern Plant Diagnostic Network

Sherrie Smith Issue 2-March 16, 2012

This bulletin from the Cooperative Extension
Plant Health Clinic (Plant Disease Clinic) is an
electronic update about diseases and other
problems observed in our lab each month.
Input from everybody interested in plants is
welcome and appreciated.

"This work is supported by the Crop Protection
and Pest Management Program [grant no.
2017-70006-27279/project accession no.
1013890] from the USDA National Institute of
Food and Agriculture."

The University of Arkansas System Division of Agriculture offers all its Extension and Research programs to all eligible
persons without regard to race, color, sex, gender identity, sexual orientation, national origin, religion, age, disability,
marital or veteran status, genetic information, or any other legally protected status, and is an Affirmative Action/Equal
Opportunity Employer.