# Document 123444

DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE
Ut RESEARCH & EXTENSION
University of Arkansas System

Sherrie Smith

Arkansas Plant Health Clinic
Newsletter

Follow us on social media

 £| Facebook

Euonymus

Euonymus scale is a serious insect pest of
euonymus. Scale infestations are often
overlooked until they do serious damage.
These tiny insects damage plants by using their
piercing sucking mouthparts to feed on sap.
Heavily infested plants grow slowly and may
have yellow spots on the leaves. Severe
infestations may cause branch dieback and
plant death. The males with their elongate white
bodies are the most noticeable symptom. They
can heavily encrust the leaves and stems of the
plant. Females are larger (over 1/16 inch long),
brown, and pear-shaped. Plants growing next
to buildings suffer grater damage as a rule than
do those with good air circulation. Euonymus
scale also attack pachysandra, bittersweet,
camellia, celastrus, ivy, hibiscus, holly, and
ligustrum. There are several generations a
year. Crawlers are active in May, June, and
July. | Over-fertilization and poor watering
practices promote scale infestations. Heavily
infested plants may be pruned back, and new
growth protected with insecticide treatments.
Dormant oils applied during the winter months
help reduce over-wintering populations. Fine
horticultural oils and insecticidal soaps are
options for summer control. Sevin, Malathion,

¢ oe SPDN
outhern Plant Diagnostic Network

Issue 8-June 12 ,2006

and permethrins are also listed for scale
(MP 144).

Euonymus Scale- Unaspis euonymi

Photo by Sherrie Smith, University of Arkansas
Cooperative Extension

Hydrangea

Hydrangeas are widely used in the home
landscape, valued for their versatility and
showy blooms. Although they are for the most
part hardy and healthy, several fungal diseases
can attack them. A sample came into the clinic
last week with typical symptoms of Cercospora
leaf spot. On big leaf hydrangea small circular
purple to brown spots appear first on lower
leaves, with infection gradually spreading up
the plant to new leaves. The centers of older
spots become tan to light gray with a purple
halo. Heavily spotted leaves turn yellow and

The University of Arkansas System Division of Agriculture offers all its Extension and Research programs to all eligible
persons without regard to race, color, sex, gender identity, sexual orientation, national origin, religion, age, disability,
marital or veteran status, genetic information, or any other legally protected status, and is an Affirmative Action/Equal

Opportunity Employer.

=== New Page ===

DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE
Ut RESEARCH & EXTENSION
University of Arkansas System
Sherrie Smith

may fall to the ground. The spots on oak leaf
hydrangea are often angular instead of circular.
Removing diseased leaves and _ avoiding
overhead irrigation will usually — slow
development of this disease. Protective
fungicides may be applied with good results.
Anthracnose (Colletotrichum gloeosporioides)
may also occur on hydrangeas although we
don’t see it quite as often. The spots are brown,
up to an inch in diameter developing a bulls-eye
appearance. Over _ fertilization makes
hydrangea susceptible to anthracnose. The
irregular blotches may also spread across the
flower petals. Unlike Cercospora leaf spot
anthracnose may appear on leaves and blooms
in the lower and upper canopy at the same time.
The same cultural practices as described for
control of Cercospora are useful in controlling
anthracnose. The exception is a greater
reliance on fungicides, which should be applied
every 10-14 days.

Hydrangea Cercospora-
Cercospora hydrangeae

«gar - te
Photo by Sherrie Smith, University of Arkansas
Cooperative Extension

Southern Plant Diagnostic Network

Issue 8-June 12 ,2006

Daylily

Daylily leaf streak (Auerobasidium
microstictum) is a fungal infection afflicting
daylilies. Symptoms start with small reddish-
brown flecks and spots on the leaves. A central
yellow streak develops down the center of the
mid-vein that begins at the leaf tip. In severe
cases entire leaves turn yellow. Tip dieback
often occurs. Vigorous healthy plants are not
as susceptible as those stressed by drought or
nutritional factors. Plants should be watered
early in the day to allow their foliage to dry. Air
circulation can be improved by avoiding
crowding. All diseased leaves should be
cleaned up and destroyed at the end of the
season. Fungicides for ornamentals can be
applied at the first sign of the disease. See MP
154.

Daylily Leaf Streak- Auerobasidium
microstictum

Photo by Sherrie Smith, University of Arkansas
Cooperative Extension

The University of Arkansas System Division of Agriculture offers all its Extension and Research programs to all eligible
persons without regard to race, color, sex, gender identity, sexual orientation, national origin, religion, age, disability,
marital or veteran status, genetic information, or any other legally protected status, and is an Affirmative Action/Equal
Opportunity Employer.

=== New Page ===

DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE
Ut RESEARCH & EXTENSION
University of Arkansas System
Sherrie Smith

Peach and nectarine

Bacterial spot of peaches and nectarines is a
problem in susceptible cultivars. This disease is
caused by the bacterium Xanthomonas
campestris pv pruni. Infected leaves have small
reddish to purple spots and blotches that often
have a white center. As the disease progresses
the inner part of the spot falls out giving a ragged
shot hole appearance. Some viruses also
cause shot holing, but the holes don’t have the
characteristic red to purple margins. Leaves
often turn yellow and fall prematurely from the
tree. Fruit may get small dark lesions, which
become crater-like and larger as the fruit
matures. These spots may generally be
removed by peeling the fruit. There is not much
the home gardener can do but maintain
optimum care of the trees as bacterial spot is
usually more severe on poorly nourished trees.
Copper fungicides have some effect on the
disease. However, the best thing to do is to
plant resistant varieties. Another problem
afflicting peaches and nectarines this time of
year is gummosis. This is a term given to
several problems based on symptoms. Sap
oozes out of twigs, trunk, and/or fruit. These
symptoms can be caused by borer injury, plum
curculio fruit feeding, or a fungal infection by
Botryosphaeria dothidea. The best protection is
good orchard management, spraying trees for
pathogens and pests at the proper time and
keeping trees watered and fertilized to minimize
stress.

CG

Southern Plant Diagnostic Network

Issue 8-June 12 ,2006

Peach Bacterial Leaf Spot-
Xanthomonas campestris i

Photo by Sherrie Smith, University of Arkansas
Cooperative Extension

Peach Gummosis

Photo by Sherrie Smith, University of Arkansas
Cooperative Extension

The University of Arkansas System Division of Agriculture offers all its Extension and Research programs to all eligible
persons without regard to race, color, sex, gender identity, sexual orientation, national origin, religion, age, disability,
marital or veteran status, genetic information, or any other legally protected status, and is an Affirmative Action/Equal

Opportunity Employer.

=== New Page ===

DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE
Ut RESEARCH & EXTENSION
University of Arkansas System
Sherrie Smith

Nematodes on Turf by Ronnie Bateman

The word “nematode” comes from a Greek word that
means thread-like. Nematodes comprise a
large group of roundworms that parasitize
animals, humans, and plants. Species that
parasitize animals and humans may reach
several feet in length while those infesting plants
average only about 0.1 mm in length. Although
there are nematodes that infect the foliage of
plants and those that are seed-born, most plant-
parasitic nematodes infect plant roots. In this
article we will discuss nematodes that are a
problem in turf.

Symptoms of nematode damage to turf will be
most apparent with visual observation. Since
what can be seen with the eye above ground is
usually a good sign of what’s happening in the
soil, let’s begin our discussion there. Root
damage in turf grasses can be quite severe and
can vary in nature and severity with both the
species of nematodes that are present and the
severity of the infestation. Depending on the
species found, symptoms on the roots may
include stunting, lesions, galling, discoloration,
and decay of the roots. If any of these symptoms
are present plant performance will be affected.
Damage to the root system limits the plants’
ability to take in water and nutrients. This will be
most evident in times of drought, extreme heat,
disease pressure, or any other adverse growing
conditions.

Obvious visual symptoms in a lawn, golf course,
sod, etc. include; poor growth (particularly in
patches) and light green, yellowish, or brown
patches in the turf (Figures 1 & 2).

¢

Southern Plant Diagnostic Network

Issue 8-June 12 ,2006

"This work is supported by the Crop Protection
and Pest Management Program [grant no.
2017-70006-27279/project accession no.
1013890] from the USDA National Institute of
Food and Agriculture." Although there are
many different types of nematodes that can
cause at least moderate damage to turf in
Arkansas, the three most frequently detected at
problematic levels are the root-knot, ring and
sting nematodes. Of these, ring nematode is
detected most often and the sting nematode is
the most damaging where present.

If nematodes are suspected as a problem at a
given location, the problematic area or areas
should be soil sampled for nematode analysis.
This should be done using a soil sampling tube
to pull about ten cores to a depth of 6 to 8
inches from each problem site. Mix the cores
together well and place the sample in a plastic
bag. The bag should be sealed to avoid drying
out the sample and labeled for proper site
identification. A nematode sample submission
form (retrievable from the UACES website
Form #AGRI-483) should be filled out and
submitted with each sample. The sample(s)
should then be sent to the local county
extension office for submission to the Arkansas
Nematode Diagnostic Laboratory, or they may
be sent directly to the laboratory at: Arkansas
Nematode Diagnostic Laboratory, 262
Highway 174 N., Hope, AR 71801. For more
information, contact your local county agent or
contact the Arkansas Nematode Diagnostic
Laboratory at (870) 777-9702.

The University of Arkansas System Division of Agriculture offers all its Extension and Research programs to all eligible
persons without regard to race, color, sex, gender identity, sexual orientation, national origin, religion, age, disability,
marital or veteran status, genetic information, or any other legally protected status, and is an Affirmative Action/Equal

Opportunity Employer.

=== New Page ===

DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE .
Ut RESEARCH & EXTENSION ai
University of Arkansas System Southern Plant Diagnostic Network
Sherrie Smith Issue 8-June 12 ,2006

Allen Buchinski University of California Cooperative
Extension Service

Figure 1. Root-knot nematode on bermuda
sod.

Figure 2. Sting nematode on bermuda sod.

The University of Arkansas System Division of Agriculture offers all its Extension and Research programs to all eligible
persons without regard to race, color, sex, gender identity, sexual orientation, national origin, religion, age, disability,
marital or veteran status, genetic information, or any other legally protected status, and is an Affirmative Action/Equal
Opportunity Employer.