# Document 123559

2009 Arkansas

Corn and Grain
Sorghum
Research
Verification
Program

Ly UNIVERSITY OF ARKANSAS
DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE

Cooperative Extension Service

U.S. Department of Agriculture
and County Governments Cooperating
The Corn and Grain Sorghum Research Verification Program is funded by

Arkansas corn and grain sorghum producers through checkoff monies
administered by the Arkansas Corn and Grain Sorghum Promotion Board.

=== New Page ===

=== New Page ===

Table of Contents

Authors and Acknowledgments..............::::::eeeceeeeeeeeeeeee

Tal icele|0(c;((0]a eee

Figure 1. Location of the 2009 Corn and Grain Sorghum Research Verification Fields.........

Economic AnalySis............2.0::::ceceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaes

Corn Field Reviews, Conway and Cross Counties.............

Corn Field Reviews, Desha, Independence and Lawrence Counties..............:::cseseeeeeeereeeee

Corn Field Reviews, Lee, Lonoke and Mississippi Counties

Corn Field Reviews, Monroe, Poinsett and St. Francis Counties....................c:ecceeeeeeeeeees

Grain Sorghum Field Review, Woodruff County................

Table 1. County, Hybrid, Field Size, Total Fertilizer and Soil

Information, CGSRVP 2009......

Table 2. Pesticide Usage, Irrigation, Previous Crop and Yield, CGSRVP 2009............::ee

Table 3. Selected Economic Information for the 2009 CGSRVP.............::0cccceeeeeeeeeeeeee sees

Table 4. Estimated Costs per Acre for Corn Fields, CGSRV

P 2009....0.. cece eee eee renee

Table 5. Estimated Costs per Acre for Grain Sorghum Fields, C@SRVP 2009.............

Appendix A, Corn: Economic Analysis by County..............

Appendix B, Grain Sorghum: Economic Analysis by County

10

11

12

13

13

14

15

15

16

39

=== New Page ===

CORN & GRAIN SORGHUM RESEARCH VERIFICATION PROGRAM, 2009
Conducted by:
Mr. Kevin Lawson, Program Associate

Dr Jason Kelley, Extension Agronomist — Wheat and Feed Grains
Mr. Jeffrey Hignight, Program Associate

County Agent Cooperators County Crop
Mr. Tommy Thompson — Mr. Randy Pettingill Conway Corn
Mr. Rick Wimberley Mr. Melvin Taylor Cross Corn
Mr. AJ Hood Mr. Lee Walt Desha Corn
Mr. Nathan Reinhart Mr. Steve Wyatt Independence Corn
Mr. Herb Ginn Mr. Hunter Burris Lawrence Corn
Mr. Mark Brawner &

Mr. Lazaro English Mr. Terry Swiney Lee Corn
Mr. Jeff Welch Mr. Brad Whitehead Lonoke Corn
Mrs. Jenny Stacks Mr. Heath Donner Mississippi Corn
Mr. Van Banks Mr. Bo Mason Monroe Corn
Mr. Rick Thompson Mr. David Gairhan Poinsett Corn
Mr. Mitch Crow Mr. Nathan Brown St. Francis Corn
Mr. Eugene Terhune Mr. Jeremy Knight Woodruff Grain Sorghum

Extension Service Specialists:

Dr. Leo Espinoza, Extension Soils Specialist

Dr. Scott Monfort, Extension Plant Pathologist

Mr. Phil Tacker, Extension Agricultural Engineer
Dr. Rick Cartwright, Extension Plant Pathologist
Dr. Glenn Studebaker, Extension Entomologist
Dr. Ken Smith, Extension Weed Scientist

Dr. Brad Watkins, Economist, Associate Professor

Agricultural Experiment Station, Fayetteville
Dr. Paul McLeod, Department of Entomology

Special acknowledgment to the members of the Arkansas Corn and Grain Sorghum Promotion
Board:

Mr. Tommy Young (Chairman) Mr. Doug Threlkeld
Mr. Keith Feather (Vice-Chairman) Mr. Mike Richardson
Mr. David Gammill (Secretary/Treasurer) Mr. Keith Woolverton

Mr. Stewart Weaver

=== New Page ===

INTRODUCTION

The 2009 growing season was the tenth year for the Corn and Grain Sorghum Research
Verification Program (CGSRVP). The CGSRVP is an interdisciplinary effort between growers,
county Extension agents, Extension specialists, and researchers. The CGSRVP is an on-farm
demonstration of all the research-based recommendations required to grow corn and grain
sorghum profitably in Arkansas. The specific objectives of the program are:

1. To verify research-based recommendations for profitable corn and grain sorghum
production in all corn and grain sorghum producing areas of Arkansas.

2. To develop a database for economic analysis of all aspects of corn and grain
sorghum production.

3. To demonstrate that consistently high yields of corn and grain sorghum can be
produced economically with the use of available technology and inputs.

4. To identify specific problems and opportunities in Arkansas corn and grain sorghum
production for further investigation.

5. To promote timely implementation of cultural and management practices among corn
and grain sorghum growers.

6. To provide training and assistance to county agents with limited expertise in corn and
grain sorghum production.

Each CGSRVP field and cooperator was selected prior to planting. Cooperators agreed
to pay production expenses, provide crop expense data for economic analysis and implement
the recommended production practices in a timely manner from seedbed preparation to harvest.
Twelve growers were enrolled in the CGSRVP in the spring of 2009, eleven corn and one grain
sorghum field. The fields were located on commercial farms ranging in size from 13 to 133
acres for corn fields, and 20.5 acres for the grain sorghum field. The average field size was 53
acres for the corn fields.

The 2009 CGSRVP corn fields were conducted in Conway, Cross, Desha,
Independence, Lawrence, Lee, Lonoke, Mississippi, Monroe, Poinsett, and St. Francis
Counties; and one grain sorghum field in Woodruff County. Six different corn hybrids (DeKalb
DKC 64-79VT3, Mycogen 2T826, Pioneer 31D59, Pioneer 33M57, Pioneer 33N58, and Terral
TV26TR41) and one grain sorghum variety (Pioneer 84G62) were planted. Management
decisions were based on field history, soil test results, hybrids, and data collected from each
individual field during the growing season.

=== New Page ===

=== New Page ===

ECONOMIC ANALYSIS

This section provides information on the development of estimated production costs for
the 2009 CGSRVP. Records of field operations on each field provided the basis for estimating
these costs. The field records were compiled by the CGSRVP coordinator, county Extension
agents, and cooperators in the 2009 CGSRVP.

Using CGSRVP production data from the 12 fields (11 corn and 1 grain sorghum),
operating costs, and net returns above total specified costs assuming a 25 percent (25%) land
rent were estimated for each field. Break-even prices needed to cover total specified costs are
also presented.

Direct Expenses

Direct expenses are those expenditures that would generally require annual cash
outlays and would be included on an annual operating loan application. Actual quantities of all
operating inputs as reported by the cooperators were used in this analysis. The prices used for
these inputs were largely provided by the producer cooperators. When necessary, input prices
were utilized from the “2009 Corn and Grain Sorghum Cost of Production Estimates” published
by the Cooperative Extension Service.

Fuel and repair costs for machinery were calculated using a budget generator based on
parameters and standards published in the American Society of Agricultural Engineers 1993
Handbook. Therefore, the producers' actual machinery costs will vary from the machinery cost
estimates that are presented in this report. However, the producers' actual field operations
were used as a basis for calculations and his equipment size and type were matched as closely
as possible to the existing data set used in the annual set of state crop budgets.

Direct expenses, shown in Table 3, for the CGSRVP corn fields ranged from $365.65
per acre for Independence County to $548.34 per acre for Lonoke County and averaged
$482.27 per acre. The grain sorghum field in Woodruff County was estimated to have $290.46
per acre in direct expenses. Corn direct expenses per bushel ranged from $2.16 in
Independence County to $5.02 in Cross County and averaged $2.94 per bushel. Grain
Sorghum direct expenses for Woodruff County were $3.93 per bushel. Due primarily to price
decreases in fertilizer and fuel, 2009 direct expenses were on average 8% less for corn and
10% lower for grain sorghum than in 2008. Corn fertilizer expense decreased approximately
12% in 2009 and fuel expense decreased 53% compared to 2008. Seed and herbicide expense
increased in 2009 over expenses in 2008 by 21% and 37%, respectively.

Fixed or Ownership Costs

Fixed expenses represent the cost of owning farm equipment. These costs can vary
greatly from one farm to another depending on the farm's size, management, and annual use of
machinery. The fixed expenses presented in Table 3 include depreciation and interest. These
costs are based on estimated initial cost and expected useful life of machinery similar to that
used by the producer. Ownership costs were allocated on a per acre basis using estimated
performance rates and hours of annual use. Calculations were made by using a budget
generator based on parameters and standards published in the American Society of Agricultural
Engineers 1993 Handbook.

=== New Page ===

Economic costs may differ from short-run tax based cash accounting figures for a
particular year. The economic approach spreads these costs over the entire useful life of the
machinery. In the long-run, the farm business must cover these costs to remain viable.

Fixed costs ranged from $50.06 per acre in St. Francis County to $111.35 per acre in
Conway County for the corn fields and averaged $64.44 per acre while the grain sorghum field
was $68.55 per acre.

Using custom operators rather than owning equipment replaces fixed expenses with
direct expenses (custom work). Cooperators with high fixed expenses but low custom work
expenses typically use high-clearance sprayers for chemical applications and spreaders
(buggies) for fertilizer applications instead of hiring aerial or ground custom applicators.

Total Costs (Direct and Fixed Costs)

Since fixed or ownership costs can be substituted for direct cost and vice-versa, total
specified expense is calculated to give the true picture of expenses. Total direct and fixed costs
presented in Table 3 are the summation of direct expenses and fixed or ownership costs. Not
included in these costs are charges for land, risk, overhead, and management. The overhead
and management costs would be better addressed at the whole-farm level and are not included
in this analysis. Total direct costs plus ownership costs ranged from $512.72 to $631.05 per
acre for corn and $359.01 per acre for the grain sorghum field. Overall, total costs for corn
averaged $546.71 per acre.

Break-even prices needed to cover total direct costs plus fixed costs ranged from $2.55
to $5.61 per bushel with an average of $3.34 per bushel while the grain sorghum break-even
price was $4.85 per bushel.

Land Costs

Land costs incurred by producers participating in the CGSRVP would likely vary from
land ownership, cash rent, or some form of crop share arrangement. Therefore, a comparison
of these divergent cost structures would contribute little to this analysis. For this reason, a 25
percent (25%) crop share rental arrangement was assumed, with the landlord paying only their
share for drying and the checkoff fee (Table 3). This is not meant to imply that this arrangement
is normal or that is should be used in place of existing arrangements. It is simply a constant
measure to be used across all CGSRVP fields. There are many other tenancy arrangements
that are in use.

Table 3 presents the cost of production per bushel after 25 percent (25%) of the yield is
given to the landlord. For corn, these break-even prices ranged from $3.18 per bushel in
Poinsett County to $7.41 per bushel in Cross County. For grain sorghum, break-even price
including rent was $6.47 per bushel for Woodruff County.

Net Returns Per Acre

Table 3 presents estimated returns per acre above “Total Costs” plus a 25 percent
(25%) crop share rent assuming a corn price of $3.25 per bushel and a grain sorghum price of
$3.15 per bushel. The corn and grain sorghum producer price used in this analysis is the
September 2009 monthly average price obtained from the USDA National Agricultural Statistical
Service (NASS). Net returns above “Total Costs and Land Rent” ranged from -$302.56 to

6

=== New Page ===

$10.33 per acre for corn and -$184 per acre for the grain sorghum field. Additional costs related
to risk, overhead, and management have not been included. These costs must be accounted
for in any further interpretation of this data.

Estimated Direct Costs

Tables 4 and 5 lists estimated direct costs per acre by field for corn and grain sorghum
production. The largest specified operating cost for corn was the fertilizer and seed cost,
averaging $184.14 and $97.99, respectively. Fertilizer cost was the highest direct costs per
acre for grain sorghum at $124.00 per acre. Seed, fertilizer, and diesel cost account for
approximately 67% of input costs for corn and 57% for grain sorghum in the 2009 CGSRVP.
Also included in the report are detailed estimated costs for each county in Appendix A and B.

=== New Page ===

CORN FIELD REVIEWS
Conway County

The Conway County corn research verification field was located in the south east part of
the county just southeast of Morrilton. The producer for the field was Mr. Randy Pettingill and
there was no agent due to the retirement of Mr. Tommy Thompson. The field was 39.5 acres
and the previous crop was soybeans. The soil type was Dardanelle silt loam with some Roxana
silt loam in the north part of the field. The field was deep ripped in the fall. A preplant fertilizer
of 88-67-67-24-10 was applied on April 25 and cultivated in. The field was planted on April 25
with Terral TV 26TR41 at 34,000 seeds per acre with 30 inch row spacing. The field was
planted flat since it was pivot irrigated. The final plant stand was 31,800 plants per acre. On
May 20, 1.5 quarts of Atrazine, 1 oz of Resolve Q, plus 1 quart of Glyphosate was applied. 275
pounds of Urea (127 units) plus 50 pounds of Ammonium Sulfate (11 units N, 12 units S) was
applied on May 21. The pivot was started on June 4, and the field was irrigated 6 times. An
additional application of 100 pounds of Urea (46 units) was applied on June 18, due to the
excessive rain that the field had received. Total fertilizer for this field was 272-67-67-36-10.
After the pre tassel application of Urea was applied a storm came through the area with winds
between 60 and 70 miles an hour. The combination of the fast growing stalks and the hard
winds green snapped approximately 25% of the field. Southern rust was found in the field on
July 17 in the R4 stage. The field was continually scouted but it was determined a fungicide
was not needed. The field was harvested on September 25 and yielded 183.66 bushels per
acre adjusted to 15.5% moisture.

Cross County

The Cross County corn research verification field was located in the central part of the
county just northwest of Wynne. The producer for the field was Mr. Melvin Taylor and the
county agent was Mr. Rick Wimberley. The field was 67 acres and the previous crop was
soybeans. The soil type was a combination of Crowley and Calloway silt loam. On April 6, a
preplant fertilizer of 100-70-70-0-10 was applied and cultivated in. After the field was bedded, it
was planted with Pioneer 33M57 at a rate of 35,500 seeds per acre with 30 inch row spacing.
A starter fertilizer of 10-20-5 was applied with the planter. Total preplant fertilizer was 110-90-
75-0-10. A stand count was taken after the field emerged and a final plant stand of 31,800
plants per acre was determined. Excessive rains delayed herbicide applications and on May 14
the producer applied 3 oz of Callisto plus 1 quart of Glyphosate. Callisto was used instead of
Atrazine due to the height of the plants. 275 pounds of Urea (127 units) was aerially applied on
May 15. A pre tassel application of 100 pounds of Urea (46 units) was applied on June 10.
Total fertilizer for this field was 283-90-75-0-10. Furrow irrigation was started on June 24 and
the field was irrigated 4 times. Due to water deficit stress and hot temperatures, this field had
poor pollination. The field was harvested on September 9 and yielded 97.01 bushels per acre
adjusted to 15.5% moisture.

=== New Page ===

Desha County

The Desha County corn research verification field was located in the northwest part of
the county near Dumas. The producer for the field was Mr. Lee Walt and the county agent was
Mr. AJ Hood. The field was 37.6 acres and the previous crop was soybeans. The soil type was
Hebert silt loam with some Rilla silt loam in the northeast part of the field. A preplant fertilizer of
80-80-70-10-2 was applied and the field was bedded. On March 23 the field was planted with
DeKalb 64-79 VT3 at a seeding rate of 34,000 plants per acre with 38 inch row spacing. The
final plant population was 32,650 plants per acre. On April 25, 1 quart of Atrazine plus 1 quart
of Glyphosate was applied for weeds. 260 pounds of Urea (120 units) was applied on April 26.
An additional 1 quart of Atrazine and 1 quart of Glyphosate was applied on May 16 for another
flush of weeds. A pre tassel application of 100 lbs of Urea (46 units) was applied on June 2.
Total fertilize for this field was 246-80-70-10-2. Furrow irrigation was started on June 10 and
the field was irrigated 4 times through the season. The field was harvested on September 2 and
yielded 214.24 bushels per acre adjusted to 15.5% moisture.

Independence County

The Independence County corn research verification field was located in the southeast
part of the county near Oil Trough. The producer for the field was Mr. Steve Wyatt and the
county agent was Mr. Nathan Reinhart. The field was 81.5 acres and the previous crop was
soybeans. The soil type was an Egam silt loam. On April 8, 375 pounds of 23-18-16 was
applied per acre by the producer. The field was cultivated then bedded. The field was planted
on May 9 with Mycogen 2T826 at a seeding rate of 32,000 seeds per acre with 30 inch row
spacing. The final plant population was 30,600 plants per acre. Due to excess rain 100 pounds
of Urea (46 units) was applied on May 12. On May 19 the producer applied 2 quarts of Atrazine
plus 1 quart of Glyphosate. The producer applied 150 pounds of Urea (69 units) plus 50 pounds
of Ammonium Sulfate (11 units N, 12 units S) on May 22. A pre tassel application of 100
pounds per acre of Urea (46 units) was applied on June 9. The total fertilizer for this field was
258-68-60-12. Rains throughout the growing season were timely and sometimes excessive and
a few storms with high winds caused a small amount of green snap. A flood irrigation was
applied on July 1 and another one was started on July 9, but only half the field was irrigated due
to a rain. Southern rust was found in the field, but the corn was far enough along so no
fungicide was applied. The field was harvested on September 9 and yielded 168.93 bushels per
acre adjusted to 15.5% moisture.

Lawrence County

The Lawrence County corn research verification field was located in the Walnut Ridge
area of the county. The producer was Mr. Hunter Burris and the county agent was Mr. Herb
Ginn. The field was 40 acres and the previous crop was corn. The soil type was Dundee silt
loam. The field received 1 ton of chicken litter in the fall. The analysis for the litter was 0-63-48.
Additional commercial fertilizer of 285 pounds per acre of 30-0-21 was added on March 20 and
disked in to bring nitrogen and potassium levels up to preplant requirements. Total preplant
fertilizer was 86-63-108. The field was bedded, then planted on April 7. The field was planted
with Pioneer 33N58 at a seeding rate of 38,000 seed per acre with 30 inch row spacing. The
final plant population was 36,900 plants per acre. An application of 250 pounds of Urea (115
units) plus 50 pounds of Ammonium Sulfate (11 units N, 12 units S) was applied on May 15. On
May 19 the producer applied 2 quarts of Atrazine, 1.2 ounces of Resolve Q, plus 22 ounces of
Roundup. A pre tassel application of 100 pounds per acre of Urea (46 units) was applied on
June 13. The total fertilizer for this field was 258-63-108-12. Irrigation was started on June 23.
The field was furrow irrigated 4 times. The field was harvested on September 29 and yielded
224 bushels per acre adjusted to 15.5% moisture.

9

=== New Page ===

Lee County

The Lee County corn research verification field was located in the northwest area of the
county near Holub. The producer was Mr. Terry Swiney and the county agents were Mr. Mark
Brawner and Mr. Lazaro English. The field was 53 acres and the previous crop was soybeans.
The soil type was Calloway silt loam. The field was disked on April 25. A preplant fertilizer of O-
40-70 was applied on April 25. The field was bedded then planted in Pioneer 33M57 at a
seeding rate of 36,000 seeds per acre with a 38 inch row spacing. The final plant population
was 36,600 plants per acre. An application of 250 pounds of Urea (115 units) plus 50 pounds of
Ammonium Sulfate (11 units N, 12 units S) was applied on May 23. On the same day, 1.5
quarts of Atrazine plus 22 ounces of Roundup was applied to the field. A pre tassel application
of 100 pounds per acre of Urea (46 units) was applied on June 18. Total fertilizer for the field
was 172-40-70-12. Irrigation was started on June 28. The field was furrow irrigated and
received 4 irrigations. Southern rust was found in the field at the R3 stage, and 14 ounces of
Quilt per acre was applied. The field was harvested on October 22 and yielded 185.57 bushels
per acre adjusted to 15.5% moisture.

Lonoke County

The Lonoke County corn research verification field was located in the southeastern part
of the county near Coy. The producer was Mr. Brad Whitehead and the county agent was Mr.
Jeff Welch. The field was 133 acres and the previous crop was corn. The soil type was
Caspinana and Herbert silt loam. The field was hipped on April 7. A preplant fertilizer of
chicken litter and 87-23-0-12-10 was applied on April 10. The field was planted in DeKalb 64-79
VT3 at the rate of 33,500 seeds per acre with a 38 inch row spacing. The final plant population
was 32,100 plants per acre. 1 quart of Glyphosate plus 8 ounces of Clarity was applied on May
12. Urea at 270 pounds per acre (124 units) was applied on May 19 by the producer. 2 quarts
of Atrazine plus 1 quart of Glyphosate was applied on May 26. Furrow irrigation was started on
June 8, and the field was irrigated 5 times. A pre tassel application of 100 pounds per acre of
Urea (46 units) was applied on June 15. Total fertilizer for the field was 257-23-0-12-10. The
field was harvested on September 1 and yielded 185.0 bushels per acre adjusted to 15.5%
moisture.

Mississippi County

The Mississippi County corn research verification field was located in the western part of
the county just south of Manila. The producer was Mr. Heath Donner and the county agent was
Ms. Jenny Stacks. The field was 24 acres and the previous crop was soybeans. The soil type
was Amagon Sandy Loam. A preplant fertilizer of 85-0-60-24 was applied on April 27 and
cultivated in. The field was bedded and planted with Pioneer 31D59 at the rate of 34,400 seeds
per acre with a 38 inch row spacing. The producer applied 2 quarts of Atrazine, 1.25 ounces of
Resovle Q, plus 1 quart of Glyphosate on May 21. Excessive rains didn’t allow for fertilization
until the V8 stage, so instead of sidedress and pre tassel nitrogen, only a sidedress application
of fertilize was applied. On June 9 325 pounds of Urea (150 units) plus 50 pounds of
Ammonium Sulfate (11 units N, 12 units S) was applied to the field. The total fertilizer for the
field was 246-0-60-36. The first furrow irrigation was June 19 and the field was irrigated a total
of 5 times. The field was harvested on September 30 and yielded 131.76 bushels per acre
adjusted to 15.5% moisture.

10

=== New Page ===

Monroe County

The Monroe County corn research verification field was located in the northern part of
the county, just north of Brinkley. The producer was Mr. Bo Mason and the county agent was
Mr. Van Banks. The field was 15.3 acres and the previous crop was soybeans. The soil type
was Henry silt loam. The field was disked on April 1, cultivated and then floated. A preplant
fertilize of 90-62-77-15-1 was applied May 8, then the field was bedded and then planted in
Pioneer 33M57 at a rate of 34,000 seeds per acre with a 30 inch row spacing. Urea was
applied at 275 pounds per acre (127 units) on May 19. On May 22, 2 quarts of Atrazine plus 1
quart of Glyphosate was applied. On June 10, a pre tassel application of 100 pounds per acre
of Urea (46 units) was applied. Total fertilize for this field was 263-62-77-15-1. Furrow irrigation
was started on June 28. The field was irrigated 3 times. Due to water deficit stress and hot
temperatures, this field had poor pollination. Southern rust was found on July 16 at the R4
stage and 12 ounces of Quilt was applied on July 17. The field was harvested on September 3
and yielded 123.18 bushels per acre adjusted to 15.5% moisture.

Poinsett County

The Poinsett County corn research verification field was located in the eastern part of
the county, just west of Trumann. The producer was Mr. David Gairhan and the county agent
was Mr. Rick Thompson. The field was 13 acres and the previous crop was soybeans. The soil
type was Dundee silt loam. The field was cultivated on April 25 and a preplant fertilize of 159-
46-114-30-13 was applied on April 26. The field was bedded and planted on April 26 with
Pioneer 31D59 at the rate of 35,000 seed per acre with a 38 inch twin row. On June 3 the
producer applied 1 quart of Glyphosate. The field was fertilized on June 3 with 200 pounds of
Urea per acre (92 units). A pre tassel application of 100 pounds per acre of Urea (46 units) was
applied on June 14. Total fertilizer for this field was 297-46-114-30-13. The first furrow
irrigation was on June 21. The field was furrow irrigated 5 times. Southern rust was found in
the field on July 14 at the R3 stage. The field was sprayed with 14 ounces of Quilt on July 17.
The field was harvested on September 3 and yielded 203.0 bushels per acre adjusted to 15.5%
moisture.

St Francis County

The St. Francis County corn research verification field was located in the northwestern
part of the county near Wheatley. The producer was Mr. Nathan Brown and the county agent
was Mr. Mitch Crow. The field was 27.8 acres and the previous crop was soybeans. The soil
type is Hillemann silt loam with some Henry silt loam. A preplant fertilizer of 85-69-60 was
applied on April 7 and disked in. The field was bedded and planted in DeKalb 64-79 VT3 at the
rate of 32,000 seeds per acre with a 30 inch row. The final plant population for the field was
32,000 plants per acre. Excessive rains drowned out part of the field which led to a lower yield.
On April 30, 2 quarts of Atrazine plus 1 quart of Glyphosate was applied. An application of 250
pounds of Urea (115 units) plus 50 pounds of Ammonium Sulfate (11 units N, 12 units S) was
applied on May 21 followed by 0.5 quarts of Atrazine plus 1 quart of Glyphosate. A pretassel
application of 100 pounds of Urea (46 units) was applied on June 3. The total fertilizer for this
field was 257-69-60-12. Furrow irrigation was started on June 18 and the field was irrigated 6
times. Southern rust was found in this field, but the corn was far enough along that a fungicide
application was not needed. The field was harvested on September 4 and yielded 175.97
bushels per acre adjusted to 15.5% moisture.

11

=== New Page ===

GRAIN SORGHUM FIELD REVIEWS
Woodruff County

The Woodruff County grain sorghum research verification field was located in the central
part of the county near Wiville. The producer was Mr. Jeremy Knight and the county agent was
Mr. Eugene Terhune. The field was 20.5 acres and the previous crop was soybeans. The soil
type was Grenada silt loam with some Calloway silt loam. A preplant fertilizer of 200 pounds of
0-0-60 was applied and the field was hipped. The field was planted with Pioneer 84G62 at a
rate of 8 pounds per acre on April 25 with a 15 inch row spacing. On April 26, 10 gallons of
32% UAN (35 units), 1.3 pints of Dual, 1 quart of Atrazine, plus 1 quart of Glyphosate was
applied. The final plant population was 68,500 plants per acre. 200 pounds of Urea (92 units)
was applied on May 20. The total fertilizer for this field was 127-0-120. Another application of 1
quart of Atrazine was applied on May 20 following the fertilizer application. The field was furrow
irrigated 1.5 times with the first irrigation coming on June 29. The field was scouted for worms
and midge and an application of 1.6 ounces of Karate was applied on July 25. As the rains
continued, the field developed anthracnose. Harvest was delayed due to heavy rains in the fall.
The field was finally harvested on September 4, and by then there was excessive anthracnose
and seed sprouting. Many seeds had shattered from the heads. The final yield was 74 bushels
per acre adjusted to 14.0% moisture.

12

=== New Page ===

Table 1. County, Hybrid, Field Size, Total Fertilizer and Soil Information CGSRVP Fields 2009.

Row Sp. Field Size Fertilizer
County Planting Date (in) Hybrid (Ac) N-P-K-S-Zn Ibs/acre Soil Classification
Corn
Conway 4/25/09 30 Terral TV 26TR41 39.5 272-67-67-36-10 Dardanelle/Roxana Silt Loam
Cross 4/6/09 30 Pioneer 33M57 67 283-90-75-0-10 Crowley/Calloway silt Loam
Desha 3/23/09 38 DeKalb 64-79VT3 37.6 246-80-70-0-10 Herbert/Rilla Silt Loam
Independence 4/9/09 30 Mycogen 2T826 81.5 258-68-60-12-0 Egam Silt Loam
Lawrence 4/7109 30 Pioneer 33N58 40 258-63-108-12-0 Dundee Silt Loam
Lee 4/25/09 38 Pioneer 33M57 53 172-40-70-12-0 Calloway Silt Loam
Lonoke 4/10/09 38 DeKalb 64-79VT3 133 257-23-0-12-10 Caspinana/Herbert Silt Loam
Mississippi 4/27/09 38 Pioneer 31D59 24 246-0-60-36-0 Amagon Sandy Loam
Monroe 4/8/09 30 Pioneer 33M57 15.3 263-62-77-15-1 Henry Silt Loam
Poinsett 4/26/09 38 twin Pioneer 31D59 13 297-46-114-30-13 Dundee Silt Loam
St. Francis 4/9/09 30 DeKalb 64-79VT3 27.8 257-69-60-12-0 Hileman/Henry Silt Loam
Grain Sorghum
Woodruff 4/25/09 15 Pioneer 84G62 20.5 127-0-120-0-0 Grenada Silt Loam

Table 2. Pesticide Usage, Irrigation, Previous Crop and Yield, C@SRVP 2009.

Irrigation Previous Yield
County Herbicide, Insecticide & Fungicide Irrigation Type Crop (bu/a)
Corn
Conway 1.5 qt Atrazine + 1 oz Resolve Q +1 gt Glyphosate — May 20 6 times Pivot Soybeans 183.66
Cross 3 oz Callisto + 1 qt Glyphosate — May 14 4 times Furrow Soybeans 97.01
Desha 1 qt Atrazine + 1 qt Glyphosate — April 25 & May 16 4 times Furrow Soybeans 214.24
Independence 2 qt Atrazine + 1 gt Glyphosate — May 19 1.5 times Flood Soybeans 168.93
Lawrence 2 qt Atrazine + 1.2 oz Resolve Q + 22 oz Roundup — May 19 4 times Furrow Corn 224.00
Lee 1.5 qt Atrazine + 22 oz Roundup — May 23, 14 oz Quilt — July 20 4 times Furrow Soybeans 185.57
Lonoke 1 qt Glyphosate + 8 oz Clarity — April 12, 2 qt Atrazine + 1 qt Glyphosate — May 26 5 times Furrow Corn 185.00
Mississippi 2 qt Atrazine + 1.25 oz Resolve Q + 1 qt Glyphosate — May 21 5 times Furrow Soybeans 131.76
Monroe 2 qt Atrazine + 1 gt Glyphosate — May 22, 12 oz Quilt — July 17 3 times Furrow Soybeans 123.18
Poinsett 1 qt Glyphosate — June 3, 14 oz Quilt — July 17 5 times Furrow Soybeans 203.00
St. Francis 2 qt Atrazine + 1 gt Glyphosate — April 30, 0.5 gt Atrazine + 1 qt Glyphosate — May 21 6 times Furrow Soybeans 175.97
Average Yield 172.03
Grain Sorghum
Woodruff 1.3 pt Dual + 1 qt Atrazine + 1 qt Glyphosate — April 25, 1 qt Atrazine May 20 1.5 times Furrow Soybeans 74.00

=== New Page ===

Table 3. Selected Economic Information for the 2009 CGSRVP.

Returns
Break-even Above Total
Break-even Total Direct Break-even Price with Costs and

Total Direct Price with Total Fixed and Fixed Price with Land Rent Land Rent

Expenses' Direct Costs* _—Costs® Costs* Total Costs® _—Costs°® Costs’
County ($/A) ($/Bu) ($/A) ($/A) ($/Bu) ($/A) ($/A)
Corn
Conway $519.70 $2.83 $111.35 $631.05 $3.44 $4.51 -$174.19
Cross $487.38 $5.02 $56.49 $543.87 $5.61 $7.41 -$302.56
Desha $489.02 $2.28 $65.31 $554.33 $2.59 $3.38 -$21.41
Independence $365.65 $2.16 $65.61 $431.26 $2.55 $3.34 -$11.05
Lawrence $543.14 $2.42 $52.42 $595.56 $2.66 $3.48 -$38.36
Lee $464.15 $2.50 $62.40 $526.55 $2.84 $3.72 -$64.94
Lonoke $548.34 $2.96 $63.79 $612.13 $3.31 $4.35 -$151.94
Mississippi $401.77 $3.05 $52.95 $454.72 $3.45 $4.53 -$126.97
Monroe $470.59 $3.54 $68.14 $538.73 $4.06 $5.35 -$208.97
Poinsett $441.93 $2.18 $52.70 $494.63 $2.44 $3.18 $10.33
St. Francis $462.66 $2.63 $50.06 $512.72 $2.91 $3.82 -$75.00
Average $482.27 $2.94 $64.44 $546.71 $3.34 $4.38 -$117.65
Grain Sorghum
Woodruff $290.46 $3.93 $68.55 $359.01 $4.85 $6.47 -$184.00

' Direct out-of-pocket, operating expenses, such as seed, fertilizer, irrigation, etc.

? Price per bushel required by farmer to equal total direct costs. Does not include land, overhead, risk, and management costs.
5 Total fixed or ownership costs which include charges for depreciation and opportunity cost of capital.
* Total direct costs plus fixed costs which include charges for depreciation and interest on all machinery and irrigation equipment.

5 Price per bushel required by farmers to equal total direct and fixed costs. Does not include land, overhead, risk, and management costs.

® Break-even price per bushel including a 25 percent crop share rent. Does not include overhead, risk, and management costs.
7A25 percent crop share is assumed as a land charge for a renter situation. Landlord only pays share of drying and checkoff fee.

14

=== New Page ===

Table 4. Estimated Costs per Acre for Corn Fields, C@SRVP 2009.

Conway Cross Desha Independence _ Lawrence Lee Lonoke Mississippi Monroe Poinsett St.Francis weighted

Acres 40 67 38 79 40 53 133 24 15 13 28 average”
Direct Expenses ($/acre) ($/acre) ($/acre) ($/acre) ($/acre) ($/acre) ($/acre) ($/acre) ($/acre) ($/acre) ($/acre) ($/acre)
Drying/Checkoff 36.74 19.40 $42.85 $33.79 44.80 $37.12 $37.00 26.35 $24.63 $40.60 335.19 $34.44
Fertilizer $179.50 $218.00 $199.40 $152.50 $217.38 $151.50 $202.00 $143.75 $188.50 $136.98 $161.25 $184.14
Fungicides $0.00 $0.00 $0.00 $0.00 $0.00 $10.78 $0.00 $0.00 $9.24 $10.78 $0.00 $1.61
Herbicides 19.75 321.20 $19.50 $13.00 332.02 $17.86 $72.52 22.48 $13.50 $5.50 25.78 $32.84
Irrigation Supplies $0.00 $5.10 $5.10 $0.00 $6.60 $5.74 $3.62 $8.52 $10.66 $11.58 $7.92 $4.39
Crop Seed 95.20 $106.50 $95.20 $73.60 $114.00 $108.00 $100.50 96.32 $102.00 $105.00 96.00 $97.99
Custom Hire 43.23 50.53 $48.85 $39.79 64.30 $61.61 $50.25 336.35 $55.36 $63.60 63.76 $50.87
Operator Labor $6.01 $3.72 $6.50 $6.55 $3.52 $5.79 $5.48 $3.55 $5.33 $3.23 $2.19 $5.09
Irrigation Labor $1.26 $2.70 $2.70 $0.35 $2.70 $2.70 $3.35 $3.35 $2.05 $3.35 $3.99 $2.50
Hand Labor $1.77 $0.92 $2.39 $1.31 $0.63 $1.54 $1.11 $0.84 $0.98 $0.32 $0.44 $1.19
Diesel Fuel' 84.81 332.90 $37.39 $23.33 332.23 $36.16 $42.88 338.29 $31.61 $37.96 41.82 $39.26
Repairs & Maint. 335.79 10.62 $13.02 $10.38 $9.16 $11.77 $12.44 $9.82 $11.93 $10.10 10.08 $13.06
Interest on Op. Cap. 15.64 15.79 $16.12 $11.05 15.80 $13.58 $17.19 12.15 $14.80 $12.93 14.24 $14.88
Total Direct Expenses $519.70 $487.38 $489.02 $365.65 $543.14 $464.15 $548.34 $401.77 $470.59 $441.93 $462.66 $482.27

Price of diesel was assumed to be $2.00 per gallon.

2 Weighted average calculations based on 528.7 total acres.

Table 5. Estimated Costs per Acre for the Grain Sorghum Field, C@2SRVP 2009.

Woodruff
Acres 21
Direct Expenses ($/acre)
Checkoff $0.74
Fertilizer $124.00
Insecticides $4.16
Herbicides $30.90
Irrigation Supplies $9.22
Crop Seed $11.20
Custom Hire $49.30
Operator Labor $7.77
Irrigation Labor $1.40
Hand Labor $1.41
Diesel Fuel’ $30.53
Repairs & Maint. $10.40
Interest on Op. Cap. $9.43
Total Direct Expenses $290.46

Price of diesel was assumed to be $2.00 per gallon.

15

=== New Page ===

Appendix A

Corn:
Economic Analysis by County

Estimated operating expenses and crop input costs

16

=== New Page ===

Table 1.A Estimated costs per acre
Corn, Center Pivot Irrigated, Silt Loam
Conway County, University of Arkansas, 2009

ITEM UNIT PRICE QUANTITY AMOUNT YOUR FARM
dollars dollars
DIRECT EXPENSES
FERTILIZERS
19-19-19 1b 0.23 350.0000 80.50
Zine 1b 1.00 30.0000 30.00
Amm. Sulfate 1b 0.11 150.0000 16.50
Urea 1b 0.14 375.0000 52.50
HERBICIDES
Atrazine qt 3.50 1.5000 5.25
Resolve Q oz 7.50 1.0000 7.50
Glyphosate qt 7.00 1.0000 7.00
CROP SEED
Terral TV26TR41 thous 2.80 34.0000 95.20
CUSTOM HIRE
Aerial App. ac 6.50 1.0000 6.50
Haul Corn bu 0.20 183.6600 36.73
GIN/DRY
Corn Checkoff bu 0.01 183.6600 1.84
Dry Corn bu 0.19 183.6600 34.90
OPERATOR LABOR
Tractors hour 9.92 0.4768 4.74
Harvesters hour 9.92 0.1277 1.27
IRRIGATION LABOR
Center pivot Irr. hour 8.60 0.1462 1.26
HAND LABOR
Implements hour 8.60 0.2068 1.77
DIESEL FUEL
Tractors gal 2.00 4.6077 9.20
Harvesters gal 2.00 1.8070 3.61
Center pivot Irr. gal 2.00 36.0000 72.00
REPAIR & MAINTENANCE
Implements acre 4.50 1.0000 4.50
Tractors acre 1.81 1.0000 1.81
Harvesters acre 2.59 1.0000 2.59
Center pivot Irr. ac-in 1.49 18.0000 26.89
INTEREST ON OP. CAP. acre 15.64 1.0000 15.64
TOTAL DIRECT EXPENSES 519.70
FIXED EXPENSES
Implements acre 10.89 1.0000 10.89
Tractors acre 13.22 1.0000 13.22
Harvesters acre 11.77 1.0000 11.77
Center pivot Irr. each 9060.48 0.0083 75.47
TOTAL FIXED EXPENSES 111.35
TOTAL SPECIFIED EXPENSES 631.05

17

=== New Page ===

Table 1.B Estimated resource use and costs for field operations, per acre
Corn, Center Pivot Irrigated, Silt Loam
Conway County, University of Arkansas, 2009

POWER UNIT COST EQUIPMENT COST ALLOC LABOR OPERATING/DURABLE INPUT

OPERATION/ SIZE/ POWER UNIT PERF TIMES (0 rrr rrr rrr rr tcc TOTAL
OPERATING INPUT UNIT SIZE RATE OVER MTH DIRECT FIXED DIRECT FIXED HOURS cost AMOUNT PRICE cost COST
--dollars- dollars
Subsoiler low-till 8 shank MFWD 225 0.076 1.00 Nov 2.12 2.57 0.43 1.31 0.07 0.76 7.19
Spin Spreader 5 ton 2WD 130 0.042 1.00 Apr 0.66 O.71 0.27 0.64 0.08 0.78 3.06
19-19-19 lb 350.0000 0.23 80.50 80.50
Zine lb 30.0000 1.00 30.00 30.00
Amm. Sulfate lb 100.0000 0.121 11.00 11.00
Field Cultivate Fld 32' MFWD 225 0.046 1.00 Apr 1.29 1.56 0.32 1.61 0.04 0.46 5.24
Disk Bed (Hipper) 8R-30 MFWD 190 0.093 1.00 Apr 2.18 2.54 0.31 0.95 0.09 0.93 6.91
Plant & Pre-Rigid 8R-30 MFWD 170 0.101 41.00 Apr 2.15 2.71 1.23 2.79 0.20 1.88 10.76
Terral TV26TR41 thous 34.0000 2.80 95.20 95.20
Spray (Broadcast) 40' MFWD 170 0.042 1.00 May 0.89 1.13 0.12 0.17 0.06 0.60 2.91
Atrazine qt 1.5000 3.50 5.25 5.25
Resolve Q oz 1.0000 7.50 7.50 7.50
Glyphosate qt 1.0000 7.00 7.00 7.00
Spin Spreader 5 ton MFWD 190 0.042 1.00 May 0.98 1.14 0.27 0.64 0.08 0.78 3.81
Urea lb 275.0000 0.14 38.50 38.50
Amm. Sulfate lb 50.0000 0.11 5.50 5.50
Aerial App. ac 1.00 Jun 1.0000 6.50 6.50 6.50
Urea lb 100.0000 0.14 14.00 14.00
Corn Grain Cart 8R30 500 bu MFWD 190 0.031 1.00 Sep 0.74 0.86 0.15 0.31 0.03 0.32 2.38
Header - Corn 8R-30 275hp 0.127 1.00 Sep 6.20 11.77 1.40 2.47 0.12 1.27 23.11
Haul Corn bu 183.6600 0.20 36.73 36.73
Corn Checkoff bu 183.6600 0.01 1.84 1.84
Dry Corn bu 183.6600 0.19 34.90 34.90
Center pivot Irr. each 1.00 Jun 75.47 0.0083 75.47
1/2-mi Pivot Irr. ac-in Jun 65.93 0.09 0.84 12.0000 66.77
1/2-mi Pivot Irr. ac-in Jul 32.96 0.04 0.42 6.0000 33.38
TOTALS 17.21 24.99 103.39 86.36 0.95 9.04 374.42 615.41
INTEREST ON OPERATING CAPITAL 15.64
UNALLOCATED LABOR 0.00
TOTAL SPECIFIED COST 631.05

18

=== New Page ===

Table 2.A Estimated costs per acre
Corn, Furrow Irrigated, Silt Loam
Cross County, University of Arkansas, 2009

ITEM UNIT PRICE QUANTITY AMOUNT YOUR FARM
dollars dollars
DIRECT EXPENSES
FERTILIZERS
100-70-70-0-10 1b 1.33 100.0000 133.00
White Lightning gal 5.75 5.0000 28.75
Urea 1b 0.15 375.0000 56.25
HERBICIDES
Callisto oz 4.75 3.0000 14.25
Glyphosate qt 6.95 1.0000 6.95
IRRIGATION SUPPLIES
Roll-Out Pipe ft 0.20 25.5000 5.10
CROP SEED
Pioneer 33M57 thous 3.00 35.5000 106.50
CUSTOM HIRE
Custom App. acre 5.25 2.0000 10.50
Aerial App. ac 15.13 1.0000 15.13
Aerial App. ac 5.50 1.0000 5.50
Haul Corn bu 0.20 97.0100 19.40
GIN/DRY
Corn Checkoff bu 0.01 97.0100 0.97
Dry Corn bu 0.19 97.0100 18.43
OPERATOR LABOR
Tractors hour 9.92 0.2469 2.45
Harvesters hour 9.92 0.1277 1.27
IRRIGATION LABOR
Implements hour 8.60 0.0125 0.10
Furrow Irr. hour 8.60 0.3017 2.60
HAND LABOR
Implements hour 8.60 0.1069 0.92
DIESEL FUEL
Tractors gal 2.00 2.6498 5.29
Harvesters gal 2.00 1.8070 3.61
Furrow Irr. gal 2.00 12.0000 24.00
REPAIR & MAINTENANCE
Implements acre 4.48 1.0000 4.48
Tractors acre 1.04 1.0000 1.04
Harvesters acre 2.59 1.0000 2.59
Furrow Irr. ac-in 0.18 12.0000 2.25
INTEREST ON OP. CAP. acre 15.79 1.0000 15.79
TOTAL DIRECT EXPENSES 487.38
FIXED EXPENSES
Implements acre 9.83 1.0000 9.83
Tractors acre 7.52 1.0000 7.52
Harvesters acre 11.77 1.0000 11.77
Furrow Irr. each 3058.64 0.0083 25.49
TOTAL FIXED EXPENSES 56.49
TOTAL SPECIFIED EXPENSES 543.87

19

=== New Page ===

Table 2.B Estimated resource use and costs for field operations, per acre

Corn, Furrow Irrigated, Silt Loam
Cross County, University of Arkansas, 2009
POWER UNIT COST EQUIPMENT COST ALLOC LABOR OPERATING/DURABLE INPUT
OPERATION/ SIZE/ POWER UNIT PERF TIMES (0 rrr rrr rrr rr tcc TOTAL
OPERATING INPUT UNIT SIZE RATE OVER MTH DIRECT FIXED DIRECT FIXED HOURS cost AMOUNT PRICE cost COST
--dollars-- dollars --dollars--
Custom App. acre 1.00 Apr 1.0000 5.25 5.25 5.25
100-70-70-0-10 lb 100.0000 1.33 133.00 133.00
Field Cultivate Fld 32' MFWD 300 0.046 1.00 Apr 0.26 1.88 0.32 1.61 4.07
Bedder/Roller-Rigid 30' MFWD 225 0.062 1.00 Apr 1.74 2.10 0.27 0.84 0.06 0.62 5.57
Plant & Pre-Folding 12R-30 MFWD 190 0.067 1.00 Apr 1.57 1.83 1.42 3.23 0.13 1.25 9.30
Pioneer 33M57 thous 35.5000 3.00 106.50 106.50
Fert Appl (Liquid) 12R-30 MFWD 225 0.078 1.00 Apr 2.18 2.63 0.90 1.19 0.121 1.12 8.02
White Lightning gal 5.0000 5.75 28.75 28.75
Custom App acre 1.00 May 1.0000 5.25 5.25 5.25
Callisto oz 3.0000 4.75 14.25 14.25
Glyphosate qt 1.0000 6.95 6.95 6.95
Aerial App. ac 1.00 May 1.0000 5.13 15.13 15.13
Urea lb 275.0000 0.15 41.25 41.25
Aerial App. ac 1.00 Jun 1.0000 5.50 5.50 5.50
Urea lb 100.0000 0.15 15.00 15.00
Pipe Spool 160ac 1/4m roll 2WD 130 0.003 1.00 Jun 0.05 0.05 0.01 0.09 0.00 0.08 0.28
Roll-Out Pipe ft 25.5000 0.20 5.10 5.10
Pipe Spool 160ac 1/4m roll 2WD 130 0.003 1.00 Sep 0.05 0.05 0.01 0.09 0.00 0.08 0.28
Header - Corn 8R-30 275hp 0.127 1.00 Sep 6.20 11.77 1.40 2.47 0.12 1.27 23.11
Corn Grain Cart 8R30 500 bu MFWD 190 0.031 1.00 Sep 0.74 0.86 0.15 0.31 0.03 0.32 2.38
Haul Corn bu 97.0100 0.20 19.40 19.40
Corn Checkoff bu 97.0100 0.01 0.97 0.97
Dry Corn bu 97.0100 0.19 18.43 18.43
Furrow Irr. each 1.00 Jun 25.49 0.0083 25.49
Apply Water ac-in Jun 6.56 0.07 0.65 3.0000 7.21
Apply Water ac-in Jul 19.69 0.22 1.95 9.0000 21.64
TOTALS 12.79 21.17 30.73 35.32 0.79 7.34 420.73 528.08
INTEREST ON OPERATING CAPITAL 15.79
UNALLOCATED LABOR 0.00
TOTAL SPECIFIED COST 543.87

20

=== New Page ===

Table 3.A Estimated costs per acre
Corn, Furrow Irrigated, Silt Loam
Desha County, University of Arkansas, 2009

ITEM UNIT PRICE QUANTITY AMOUNT YOUR FARM
dollars dollars
DIRECT EXPENSES
FERTILIZERS
80-80-70-10-2 1b 1.31 100.0000 131.00
Urea 1b 0.19 360.0000 68.40
HERBICIDES
Atrazine qt 3.25 2.0000 6.50
Glyphosate qt 6.50 2.0000 13.00
IRRIGATION SUPPLIES
Roll-Out Pipe ft 0.20 25.5000 5.10
CROP SEED
DeKalb 64-79VT3 thous 2.80 34.0000 95.20
CUSTOM HIRE
Aerial App. ac 6.00 1.0000 6.00
Haul Corn bu 0.20 214.2400 42.85
GIN/DRY
Corn Checkoff bu 0.01 214.2400 2.14
Dry Corn bu 0.19 214.2400 40.71
OPERATOR LABOR
Tractors hour 9.92 0.4833 4.81
Harvesters hour 9.92 0.1702 1.69
IRRIGATION LABOR
Implements hour 8.60 0.0125 0.10
Furrow Irr. hour 8.60 0.3017 2.60
HAND LABOR
Implements hour 8.60 0.2794 2.39
DIESEL FUEL
Tractors gal 2.00 4.2871 8.57
Harvesters gal 2.00 2.4094 4.82
Furrow Irr. gal 2.00 12.0000 24.00
REPAIR & MAINTENANCE
Implements acre 5.60 1.0000 5.60
Tractors acre 1.72 1.0000 1.72
Harvesters acre 3.45 1.0000 3.45
Furrow Irr. ac-in 0.18 12.0000 2.25
INTEREST ON OP. CAP. acre 16.12 1.0000 16.12
TOTAL DIRECT EXPENSES 489.02
FIXED EXPENSES
Implements acre 11.87 1.0000 11.87
Tractors acre 12.27 1.0000 12.27
Harvesters acre 15.69 1.0000 15.69
Furrow Irr. each 3058.64 0.0083 25.48
TOTAL FIXED EXPENSES 65.31
TOTAL SPECIFIED EXPENSES 554.33

21

=== New Page ===

Table 3.B Estimated resource use and costs for field operations, per acre
Corn, Furrow Irrigated, Silt Loam
Desha County, University of Arkansas, 2009

POWER UNIT COST EQUIPMENT COST ALLOC LABOR OPERATING/DURABLE INPUT

OPERATION/ SIZE/ POWER UNIT PERF TIMES (0 rrr rrr rrr rr rr tn TOTAL
OPERATING INPUT UNIT SIZE RATE OVER MTH DIRECT FIXED DIRECT FIXED HOURS cost AMOUNT PRICE cost COST
dollars --dollars--
Disk & Incorporate 32' MFWD 225 0.065 2.00 Mar 3.63 4.39 1.73 3.58 0.19 1.86 15.19
Spin Spreader 5 ton MFWD 130 0.042 1.00 Mar 0.68 0.82 0.27 0.64 0.08 0.78 3.19
80-80-70-10-2 lb 100.0000 1.31 131.00 131.00
Bedder/Roller-Rigid 26' MFWD 130 0.072 1.00 Mar 1.17 1.41 0.29 0.91 0.07 0.72 4.50
Plant & Pre-Rigid 8R-30 MFWD 190 0.101 41.00 Mar 2.37 2.75 1.23 2.79 0.20 1.88 11.02
DeKalb 64-79VT3 thous 34.0000 2.80 95.20 95.20
Spray (Broadcast) 60' MFWD 130 0.028 1.00 Apr 0.46 0.55 0.10 0.14 0.04 0.40 1.65
Atrazine qt 1.0000 3.25 3.25 3.25
Glyphosate qt 1.0000 6.50 6.50 6.50
Spin Spreader 5 ton MFWD 130 0.042 1.00 Apr 0.68 0.82 0.27 0.64 0.08 0.78 3.19
Urea lb 260.0000 0.19 49.40 49.40
Spray (Broadcast) 60' MFWD 130 0.028 1.00 May 0.46 0.55 0.10 0.14 0.04 0.40 1.65
Atrazine qt 1.0000 3.25 3.25 3.25
Glyphosate at 1.0000 6.50 6.50 6.50
Aerial App. ac 1.00 Jun 1.0000 6.00 6.00 6.00
Urea lb 100.0000 0.19 19.00 19.00
Pipe Spool 160ac 1/4m roll MFWD 130 0.003 1.00 Jun 0.05 0.06 0.01 0.09 0.00 0.08 0.29
Roll-Out Pipe ft 25.5000 0.20 5.10 5.10
Pipe Spool 160ac 1/4m roll MFWD 130 0.003 1.00 Sep 0.05 0.06 0.01 0.09 0.00 0.08 0.29
Header - Corn 6R30" 275hp 0.170 1.00 Sep 8.27 15.69 1.44 2.54 0.17 1.69 29.63
Corn Grain Cart 8R30 500 bu MFWD 190 0.031 1.00 Sep 0.74 0.86 0.15 0.31 0.03 0.32 2.38
Haul Corn bu 214.2400 0.20 42.85 42.85
Corn Checkoff bu 214.2400 0.01 2.14 2.14
Dry Corn bu 214.2400 0.19 40.71 40.71
Furrow Irr. each 1.00 Jun 25.48 0.0083 25.48
Apply Water ac-in Jun 19.69 0.22 1.95 9.0000 21.64
Apply Water ac-in Jul 6.56 0.07 0.65 3.0000 7.21
TOTALS 18.56 27.96 31.85 37.35 1.24 11.59 410.90 538.21
INTEREST ON OPERATING CAPITAL 16.12
UNALLOCATED LABOR 0.00
TOTAL SPECIFIED COST 554.33

22

=== New Page ===

Table 4.A Estimated costs per acre

Corn, Flood Irrigated,

Silt Loam

Independence County, University of Arkansas, 2009
ITEM UNIT PRICE QUANTITY AMOUNT YOUR FARM
dollars dollars
DIRECT EXPENSES
FERTILIZERS
23-18-16 1b 0.22 375.0000 82.50
Urea 1b 0.18 350.0000 63.00
Amm. Sulf. 1b 0.14 50.0000 7.00
HERBICIDES
Atrazine qt 3.25 2.0000 6.50
Glyphosate qt 6.50 1.0000 6.50
CROP SEED
Mycogen 2T826 thous 2.30 32.0000 73.60
CUSTOM HIRE
Aerial App. ac 6.00 1.0000 6.00
Haul Corn bu 0.20 168.9300 33.79
GIN/DRY
Corn Checkoff bu 0.01 168.9300 1.69
Dry Corn bu 0.19 168.9300 32.10
OPERATOR LABOR
Tractors hour 9.92 0.4739 4.71
Harvesters hour 9.92 0.1277 1.27
Self-Propelled hour 9.92 0.0570 0.57
IRRIGATION LABOR
Flood Irr. - Crn-Sor hour 8.60 0.0407 0.35
HAND LABOR
Implements hour 8.60 0.1263 1.08
Self-Propelled hour 8.60 0.0285 0.23
DIESEL FUEL
Tractors gal 2.00 4.5309 9.07 _
Harvesters gal 2.00 1.8070 3.61
Self-Propelled gal 2.00 0.8209 1.65
Flood Irr. - Crn-Sor gal 2.00 4.5000 9.00
REPAIR & MAINTENANCE
Implements acre 3.88 1.0000 3.88
Tractors acre 1.74 1.0000 1.74
Harvesters acre 2.59 1.0000 2.59
Self-Propelled acre 0.72 1.0000 0.72
Flood Irr. - Crn-Sor ac-in 0.32 4.5000 1.45
INTEREST ON OP. CAP. acre 11.05 1.0000 11.05
TOTAL DIRECT EXPENSES 365.65
FIXED EXPENSES
Implements acre 10.12 1.0000 10.12
Tractors acre 12.79 1.0000 12.79
Harvesters acre 11.77 1.0000 11.77
Self-Propelled acre 5.45 1.0000 5.45
Flood Irr. - Crn-Sor each 3058.64 0.0083 25.48
TOTAL FIXED EXPENSES 65.61
TOTAL SPECIFIED EXPENSES 431.26

23

=== New Page ===

Table 4.B Estimated resource use and costs for field operations, per acre
Corn, Flood Irrigated, Silt Loam
Independence County, University of Arkansas, 2009

POWER UNIT COST EQUIPMENT COST ALLOC LABOR OPERATING/DURABLE INPUT

OPERATION/ SIZE/ POWER UNIT PERF TIMES (0 rrr rrr rrr rr tcc TOTAL
OPERATING INPUT UNIT SIZE RATE OVER MTH DIRECT FIXED DIRECT FIXED HOURS cost AMOUNT PRICE cost COST
--dollars- dollars
Dry Applicator SP 70'300cuft 0.015 1.00 Apr 0.67 1.52 0.02 0.21 2.40
23-18-16 lb 375.0000 0.22 82.50 82.50
Field Cult & Inc Fld 32' MFWD 190 0.049 1.00 Apr 1.15 1.34 0.41 2.05 0.07 0.70 5.65
Land Plane 50'x16' MFWD 190 0.151 1.00 Apr 3.53 4.10 0.23 0.70 0.15 1.50 10.06
Bedder/Roller-Fold. 21" MFWD 190 0.089 1.00 Apr 2.08 2.42 0.34 1.06 0.08 0.89 6.79
Plant & Pre-Rigid 8R-30 MFWD 170 0.101 41.00 Apr 2.15 2.71 1.23 2.79 0.20 1.88 10.76
Mycogen 2T826 thous 32.0000 2.30 73.60 73.60
Dry Applicator SP 70'300cuft 0.015 1.00 May 0.67 1.52 0.02 0.21 2.40
Urea lb 100.0000 0.18 18.00 18.00
Sprayer( 600-825Gal) 90' 0.011 1.00 May 0.36 0.89 0.01 0.17 1.42
Atrazine qt 2.0000 3.25 6.50 6.50
Glyphosate at 1.0000 6.50 6.50 6.50
Dry Applicator SP 70'300cuft 0.015 1.00 May 0.67 1.52 0.02 0.21 2.40
Urea lb 150.0000 0.18 27.00 27.00
Amm. Sulf. lb 50.0000 0.14 7.00 7.00
Aerial App. ac 1.00 Jun 1.0000 6.00 6.00 6.00
Urea lb 100.0000 0.18 18.00 18.00
Levee Disk 8 blade MFWD 190 0.012 2.00 Jun 0.58 0.68 0.06 0.37 0.02 0.25 1.94
Levee Disk 8 blade MFWD 190 0.012 2.00 Sep 0.58 0.68 0.06 0.37 0.02 0.25 1.94
Header - Corn 8R-30 275hp 0.127 1.00 Sep 6.20 11.77 1.40 2.47 0.12 1.27 23.11
Corn Grain Cart 8R30 500 bu MFWD 190 0.031 1.00 Sep 0.74 0.86 0.15 0.31 0.03 0.32 2.38
Haul Corn bu 168.9300 0.20 33.79 33.79
Corn Checkoff bu 168.9300 0.01 1.69 1.69
Dry Corn bu 168.9300 0.19 32.10 32.10
Flood Irr. - Crn-Sor each 1.00 Jul 25.48 0.0083 25.48
Apply Water ac-in 10.45 0.04 0.35 4.5000 10.80
TOTALS 19.38 30.01 14.33 35.60 0.85 8.21 312.68 420.21
INTEREST ON OPERATING CAPITAL 11.05
UNALLOCATED LABOR 0.00
TOTAL SPECIFIED COST 431.26

24

=== New Page ===

Table 5.A Estimated costs pi

er acre

Corn, Furrow Irrigated, Silt Loam
Lawrence County, University of Arkansas, 2009
ITEM UNIT PRICE QUANTITY AMOUNT YOUR FARM
dollars dollars
DIRECT EXPENSES
FERTILIZERS
Chicken Litter ac 37.00 1.0000 37.00
30-0-21 1b 0.27 285.0000 78.38
Urea, Solid (46% N) lb. 0.21 250.0000 52.50
Amm. Sulfate 1b 0.21 50.0000 10.50
Urea 1b 0.39 100.0000 39.00
HERBICIDES
Atrazine qt 4.75 2.0000 9.50
Glyphosate Oz 0.59 22.0000 12.98
ResolveQ oz 7.95 1.2000 9.54
IRRIGATION SUPPLIES
Roll-Out Pipe ft 0.20 33.0000 6.60
CROP SEED
Pionner 33N58 thous 3.00 38.0000 114.00
CUSTOM HIRE
Aerial App. ac 6.50 3.0000 19.50
Haul Corn bu 0.20 224.0000 44.80
GIN/DRY
Corn Checkoff bu 0.01 224.0000 2.24
Dry Corn bu 0.19 224.0000 42.56
OPERATOR LABOR
Tractors hour 9.92 0.2150 2.13
Harvesters hour 9.92 0.1277 1.27
Self-Propelled hour 9.92 0.0117 0.12
IRRIGATION LABOR
Implements hour 8.60 0.0125 0.10 _
Furrow Irr. hour 8.60 0.3017 2.60
HAND LABOR
Implements hour 8.60 0.0676 0.58
Self-Propelled hour 8.60 0.0058 0.05
DIESEL FUEL
Tractors gal 2.00 2.1962 4.38
Harvesters gal 2.00 1.8070 3.61
Self-Propelled gal 2.00 0.1209 0.24
Furrow Irr. gal 2.00 12.0000 24.00
REPAIR & MAINTENANCE
Implements acre 3.35 1.0000 3.35
Tractors acre 0.85 1.0000 0.85
Harvesters acre 2.59 1.0000 2.59
Self-Propelled acre 0.12 1.0000 0.12
Furrow Irr. ac-in 0.18 12.0000 2.25
INTEREST ON OP. CAP. acre 15.80 1.0000 15.80
TOTAL DIRECT EXPENSES 543.14
FIXED EXPENSES
Implements acre 8.13 1.0000 8.13
Tractors acre 6.15 1.0000 6.15
Harvesters acre 11.77 1.0000 11.77
Self-Propelled acre 0.89 1.0000 0.89
Furrow Irr. each 3058.64 0.0083 25.48
TOTAL FIXED EXPENSES 52.42
TOTAL SPECIFIED EXPENSES 595.56

25

=== New Page ===

Table 5.B Estimated resource use and costs for field operations, per acre

Corn, Furrow Irrigated, Silt Loam
Lawrence County, University of Arkansas, 2009
POWER UNIT COST EQUIPMENT COST ALLOC LABOR OPERATING/DURABLE INPUT
OPERATION/ SIZE/ POWER UNIT PERF TIMES (0 rrr rrr rrr rr tcc TOTAL
OPERATING INPUT UNIT SIZE RATE OVER MTH DIRECT FIXED DIRECT FIXED HOURS cost AMOUNT PRICE cost cost
--dollars- dollars
Chicken Litter ac 1.00 Nov 1.0000 37.00 37.00 37.00
Custom App. ac 1.00 Mar 1.0000 6.50 6.50 6.50
30-0-2 lb 285.0000 0.27 78.38 718.38
Field Cultivate Fld 32' MFWD 190 -046 1.00 Apr 1.08 1.26 0.32 1.61 0.04 0.46 4.73
Disk Bed (Hipper) 12R-30 MFWD 225 -062 1.00 Apr 1.74 2.10 0.30 0.94 0.06 0.62 5.70
Plant & Pre-Rigid 12R-30 MFWD 190 -067 1.00 Apr 1.57 1.83 1.16 2.62 0.13 1.25 8.43
Pionner 33N58 thous 38.0000 3.00 114.00 114.00
Custom App. ac 1.00 May 1.0000 6.50 6.50 6.50
Urea, Solid (46% N) lb. 250.0000 0.21 52.50 52.50
Amm. Sulfate lb 50.0000 0.21 10.50 10.50
Sprayer( 600-825Gal) 90' 011 41.00 May 0.36 0.89 0.01 0.17 1.42
Atrazine qt 2.0000 4.75 9.50 9.50
Glyphosate oz 22.0000 0.59 12.98 12.98
ResolveQ oz 1.2000 7.95 9.54 9.54
Aerial App. ac 1.00 Jun 1.0000 6.50 6.50 6.50
Urea lb 100.0000 0.39 39.00 39.00
Pipe Spool 160ac 1/4m roll 2WD 130 003 1.00 Jun 0.05 0.05 0.01 0.09 0.00 0.08 0.28
Roll-Out Pipe ft 33.0000 0.20 6.60 6.60
Pipe Spool 160ac 1/4m roll 2WD 130 -003 1.00 Sep 0.05 0.05 0.01 0.09 0.00 0.08 0.28
Header - Corn 8R-30 275hp -127 1.00 Sep 6.20 11.77 1.40 2.47 0.12 1.27 23.11
Corn Grain Cart 8R30 500 bu MFWD 190 -031 1.00 Sep 0.74 0.86 0.15 0.31 0.03 0.32 2.38
Haul Corn bu 224.0000 0.20 44.80 44.80
Corn Checkoff bu 224.0000 0.01 2.24 2.24
Dry Corn bu 224.0000 0.19 42.56 42.56
Furrow Irr. each 1.00 Jun 25.48 0.0083 25.48
Apply Water ac-in Jun 6.56 0.07 0.65 3.0000 7.21
Apply Water ac-in Jul 19.69 0.22 1.95 9.0000 21.64
TOTALS 11.79 18.81 29.60 33.61 0.74 6.85 479.10 579.76
INTEREST ON OPERATING CAPITAL 15.80
UNALLOCATED LABOR 0.00
TOTAL SPECIFIED COST 595.56

26

=== New Page ===

Table 6.A Estimated costs per acre

Corn, Furrow Irrigated,

Silt Loam

Lee County, University of Arkansas, 2009
ITEM UNIT PRICE QUANTITY AMOUNT YOUR FARM
dollars dollars
DIRECT EXPENSES
FERTILIZERS
0-40-70 1b 0.80 100.0000 80.00
Urea 1b 0.18 350.0000 63.00
Amm. Sulfate 1b 0.17 50.0000 8.50
FUNGICIDES
Quilt oz 0.77 14.0000 10.78
HERBICIDES
Atrazine qt 3.25 1.5000 4.88
Roundup oz 0.59 22.0000 12.98
IRRIGATION SUPPLIES
Roll-Out Pipe ft 0.20 28.7000 5.74
CROP SEED
Pioneer 33M57 thous 3.00 36.0000 108.00
CUSTOM HIRE
Custom App. ac 4.50 1.0000 4.50
Custom App. ac 4.00 2.0000 8.00
Aerial App. ac 6.00 2.0000 12.00
Haul Corn bu 0.20 185.5700 37.11
GIN/DRY
Corn Checkoff bu 0.01 185.5700 1.86
Dry Corn bu 0.19 185.5700 35.26
OPERATOR LABOR
Tractors hour 9.92 0.4123 4.10
Harvesters hour 9.92 0.1702 1.69
IRRIGATION LABOR
Implements hour 8.60 0.0125 0.10
Furrow Irr. hour 8.60 0.3017 2.60
HAND LABOR
Implements hour 8.60 0.1790 1.54
DIESEL FUEL
Tractors gal 2.00 3.6707 7.34
Harvesters gal 2.00 2.4094 4.82
Furrow Irr. gal 2.00 12.0000 24.00
REPAIR & MAINTENANCE
Implements acre 4.62 1.0000 4.62
Tractors acre 1.45 1.0000 1.45
Harvesters acre 3.45 1.0000 3.45
Furrow Irr. ac-in 0.18 12.0000 2.25
INTEREST ON OP. CAP. acre 13.58 1.0000 13.58
TOTAL DIRECT EXPENSES 464.15
FIXED EXPENSES
Implements acre 10.77 1.0000 10.77
Tractors acre 10.45 1.0000 10.45
Harvesters acre 15.69 1.0000 15.69
Furrow Irr. each 3058.64 0.0083 25.49
TOTAL FIXED EXPENSES 62.40
TOTAL SPECIFIED EXPENSES 526.55

27

=== New Page ===

Table 6.B Estimated resource use and costs for field operations, per acre
Corn, Furrow Irrigated, Silt Loam
Lee County, University of Arkansas, 2009

POWER UNIT COST EQUIPMENT COST

ALLOC LABOR

OPERATING/DURABLE INPUT

OPERATION/ SIZE/ POWER UNIT PERF TIMES (0 rrr rrr rrr rr tcc TOTAL
OPERATING INPUT UNIT SIZE RATE OVER MTH DIRECT FIXED DIRECT FIXED HOURS Cost AMOUNT PRICE cost Cost
--dollars- dollars --dollars-
Disk & Incorporate 24' MFWD 190 0.087 1.00 Apr 2.03 2.36 0.92 1.90 0.13 1.25 8.46
Field Cultivate Fld 24' MFWD 170 0.062 1.00 Apr 1.32 1.66 0.30 1.49 0.06 0.62 5.39
Custom App. ac 1.00 Apr 1.0000 4.50 4.50 4.50
0-40-70 lb 100.0000 0.80 80.00 80.00
Bedder/Roller-Fold. 21" MFWD 190 0.089 1.00 Apr 2.08 2.42 0.34 1.06 0.08 0.89 6.79
Plant & Pre-Rigid 6R-30 MFWD 150 0.135 1.00 Apr 2.52 3.05 1.45 3.29 0.27 2.50 12.81
Pioneer 33M57 thous 36.0000 3.00 108.00 108.00
Custom App. ac 1.00 May 1.0000 4.00 4.00 4.00
Urea lb 250.0000 0.18 45.00 45.00
Amm. Sulfate lb 50.0000 0.17 8.50 8.50
Custom App. ac 1.00 May 1.0000 4.00 4.00 4.00
Atrazine qt 1.5000 3.25 4.88 4.88
Roundup oz 22.0000 0.59 12.98 12.98
Aerial App. ac 1.00 Jun 1.0000 6.00 6.00 6.00
Urea lb 100.0000 0.18 18.00 18.00
Pipe Spool 160ac 1/4m roll 2WD 130 0.003 1.00 Jun 0.05 0.05 0.01 0.09 0.00 0.08 0.28
Roll-Out Pipe ft 28.7000 0.20 5.74 5.74
Aerial App. ac 1.00 Jul 1.0000 6.00 6.00 6.00
Quilt oz 14.0000 0.77 10.78 10.78
Pipe Spool 160ac 1/4m roll 2WD 130 0.003 1.00 Oct 0.05 0.05 0.01 0.09 0.00 0.08 0.28
Header - Corn 6R30" 275hp 0.170 1.00 Oct 8.27 15.69 1.44 2.54 0.17 1.69 29.63
Corn Grain Cart 8R30 500 bu MFWD 190 0.031 1.00 Oct 0.74 0.86 0.15 0.31 0.03 0.32 2.38
Haul Corn bu 185.5700 0.20 37.11 37.11
Corn Checkoff bu 185.5700 0.01 1.86 1.86
Dry Corn bu 185.5700 0.19 35.26 35.26
Furrow Irr. each 1.00 Jun 25.49 0.0083 25.49
Apply Water ac-in Jun 6.56 0.07 0.65 3.0000 7.21
Apply Water ac-in Jul 19.69 0.22 1.95 9.0000 21.64
TOTALS 17.06 26.14 30.87 36.26 1.07 10.03 392.61 512.97
INTEREST ON OPERATING CAPITAL 13.58
UNALLOCATED LABOR 0.00
TOTAL SPECIFIED COST 526.55

28

=== New Page ===

Table 7.A Estimated costs per acre

Corn, Furrow Irrigated, Silt Loam
Lonoke County, University of Arkansas, 2009
ITEM UNIT PRICE QUANTITY AMOUNT YOUR FARM
dollars dollars
DIRECT EXPENSES
FERTILIZERS
Chicken Litter tons 40.00 1.0000 40.00
Amm. Sulfate 1b 0.20 50.0000 10.00
Urea 1b 0.20 510.0000 102.00
DAP 18-46-0 1b 0.40 50.0000 20.00
Zine Sulfate 1b 1.00 30.0000 30.00
HERBICIDES
Glyphosate qt 6.50 2.0000 13.00
Clarity oz 6.44 8.0000 51.52
Atrazine qts 4.00 2.0000 8.00
IRRIGATION SUPPLIES
Roll-Out Pipe ft 0.20 18.1000 3.62
CROP SEED
DeKalb 64-79VT3 thou 3.00 33.5000 100.50
CUSTOM HIRE
Custom App. acre 5.75 1.0000 5.75
Aerial App. acre 7.50 1.0000 7.50
Haul Corn bu 0.20 185.0000 37.00
GIN/DRY
Corn Checkoff bu 0.01 185.0000 1.85
Dry Corn bu 0.19 185.0000 35.15
OPERATOR LABOR
Tractors hour 9.92 0.3699 3.67
Harvesters hour 9.92 0.1702 1.69
Self-Propelled hour 9.92 0.0117 0.12
IRRIGATION LABOR
Implements hour 8.60 0.0125 0.10
Furrow Irr. hour 8.60 0.3771 3.25
HAND LABOR
Implements hour 8.60 0.1238 1.06
Self-Propelled hour 8.60 0.0058 0.05
DIESEL FUEL
Tractors gal 2.00 3.9184 7.82
Harvesters gal 2.00 2.4094 4.82
Self-Propelled gal 2.00 0.1209 0.24
Furrow Irr. gal 2.00 15.0000 30.00
REPAIR & MAINTENANCE
Implements acre 4.52 1.0000 4.52
Tractors acre 1.54 1.0000 1.54
Harvesters acre 3.45 1.0000 3.45
Self-Propelled acre 0.12 1.0000 0.12
Furrow Irr. ac-in 0.18 15.0000 2.81
INTEREST ON OP. CAP. acre 17.19 1.0000 17.19
TOTAL DIRECT EXPENSES 548.34
FIXED EXPENSES
Implements acre 10.54 1.0000 10.54
Tractors acre 11.19 1.0000 11.19
Harvesters acre 15.69 1.0000 15.69
Self-Propelled acre 0.89 1.0000 0.89
Furrow Irr. each 3058.64 0.0083 25.48
TOTAL FIXED EXPENSES 63.79
TOTAL SPECIFIED EXPENSES 612.13

29

=== New Page ===

Table 7.B Estimated resource use and costs for field operations, per acre
Corn, Furrow Irrigated, Silt Loam
Lonoke County, University of Arkansas, 2009

POWER UNIT COST EQUIPMENT COST ALLOC LABOR OPERATING/DURABLE INPUT

OPERATION/ SIZE/ POWER UNIT PERF TIMES (0 rrr rrr rrr rr tcc TOTAL
OPERATING INPUT UNIT SIZE RATE OVER MTH DIRECT FIXED DIRECT FIXED HOURS cost AMOUNT PRICE cost COST
--dollars- dollars
Disk Bed (Hipper) 12R-30 MFWD 225 0.062 1.00 Apr 1.74 2.10 0.30 0.94 0.06 0.62 5.70
Cultivate 12R-30 MFWD 225 0.068 1.00 Apr 1.90 2.31 0.52 1.62 0.06 0.68 7.03
Disk Bed (Hipper) 12R-30 MFWD 225 0.062 1.00 Apr 1.74 2.10 0.30 0.94 0.06 0.62 5.70
Chicken Litter tons 1.00 Apr 1.0000 40.00 40.00 40.00
Amm. Sulfate lb 1.00 Apr 50.0000 0.20 10.00 10.00
Urea lb 140.0000 0.20 28.00 28.00
DAP 18-46-0 lb 50.0000 0.40 20.00 20.00
Zine Sulfate lb 30.0000 1.00 30.00 30.00
Custom App. acre 1.0000 5.75 5.75 5.75
Plant & Pre-Folding 12R-30 MFWD 190 0.067 1.00 Apr 1.57 1.83 1.42 3.23 0.13 1.25 9.30
DeKalb 64-79VT3 thou 33.5000 3.00 100.50 100.50
Sprayer( 600-825Gal) 90' 0.011 1.00 Apr 0.36 0.89 0.01 0.17 1.42
Glyphosate qt 1.0000 6.50 6.50 6.50
Clarity oz 8.0000 6.44 51.52 51.52
Spin Spreader 5 ton MFWD 190 0.042 1.00 May 0.98 1.14 0.27 0.64 0.08 0.78 3.81
Urea lb 270.0000 0.20 54.00 54.00
Spray (Band) 60' Fold MFWD 170 0.028 1.00 May 0.59 0.75 0.10 0.14 0.04 0.40 1.98
Glyphosate qt 1.0000 6.50 6.50 6.50
Atrazine qts 2.0000 4.00 8.00 8.00
Pipe Spool 160ac 1/4m roll 2WD 130 0.003 1.00 Jun 0.05 0.05 0.01 0.09 0.00 0.08 0.28
Roll-Out Pipe ft 18.1000 0.20 3.62 3.62
Aerial App. acre 1.00 Jun 1.0000 7.50 7.50 7.50
Urea lb 100.0000 0.20 20.00 20.00
Pipe Spool 160ac 1/4m roll 2WD 130 0.003 1.00 Sep 0.05 0.05 0.01 0.09 0.00 0.08 0.28
Header - Corn 6R30" 275hp 0.170 1.00 Sep 8.27 15.69 1.44 2.54 0.17 1.69 29.63
Corn Grain Cart 8R30 500 bu MFWD 190 0.031 1.00 Sep 0.74 0.86 0.15 0.31 0.03 0.32 2.38
Haul Corn bu 185.0000 0.20 37.00 37.00
Corn Checkoff bu 185.0000 0.01 1.85 1.85
Dry Corn bu 185.0000 0.19 35.15 35.15
Furrow Irr. each 1.00 Jun 25.48 0.0083 25.48
Apply Water ac-in Jun 13.12 0.15 1.30 6.0000 14.42
Apply Water ac-in Jul 19.69 0.22 1.95 9.0000 21.64
TOTALS 17.99 27.77 37.33 36.02 1.07 9.94 465.89 594.94
INTEREST ON OPERATING CAPITAL 17.19
UNALLOCATED LABOR 0.00
TOTAL SPECIFIED COST 612.13

30

=== New Page ===

Table 8.A Estimated costs per acre
Corn, Furrow Irrigated, Sandy Loam
Mississippi County, University of Arkansas, 2009

ITEM UNIT PRICE QUANTITY AMOUNT YOUR FARM
dollars dollars
DIRECT EXPENSES
FERTILIZERS
85-0-60-24 1b 0.74 100.0000 74.40
Urea 1b 0.19 325.0000 61.75
Amm. Sulfate 1b 0.19 40.0000 7.60
HERBICIDES
Atrazine qt 3.30 2.0000 6.60
Glyphosate qt 6.50 1.0000 6.50
Resolve Q oz 7.50 1.2500 9.38
IRRIGATION SUPPLIES
Roll-Out Pipe ft 0.20 42.6000 8.52
CROP SEED
Pioneer 31D59 thous 2.80 34.4000 96.32
CUSTOM HIRE
Custom App. ac 5.00 2.0000 10.00
Haul Corn bu 0.20 131.7600 26.35
GIN/DRY
Corn Checkoff bu 0.01 131.7600 1.32
Dry Corn bu 0.19 131.7600 25.03
OPERATOR LABOR
Tractors hour 9.92 0.2179 2.16
Harvesters hour 9.92 0.1277 1.27
Self-Propelled hour 9.92 0.0117 0.12
IRRIGATION LABOR
Implements hour 8.60 0.0125 0.10
Furrow Irr. hour 8.60 0.3771 3.25
HAND LABOR
Implements hour 8.60 0.0924 0.79
Self-Propelled hour 8.60 0.0058 0.05
DIESEL FUEL
Tractors gal 2.00 2.2247 4.44
Harvesters gal 2.00 1.8070 3.61
Self-Propelled gal 2.00 0.1209 0.24
Furrow Irr. gal 2.00 15.0000 30.00
REPAIR & MAINTENANCE
Implements acre 3.44 1.0000 3.44
Tractors acre 0.86 1.0000 0.86
Harvesters acre 2.59 1.0000 2.59
Self-Propelled acre 0.12 1.0000 0.12
Furrow Irr. ac-in 0.18 15.0000 2.81
INTEREST ON OP. CAP. acre 12.15 1.0000 12.15
TOTAL DIRECT EXPENSES 401.77
FIXED EXPENSES
Implements acre 8.57 1.0000 8.57
Tractors acre 6.23 1.0000 6.23
Harvesters acre 11.77 1.0000 11.77
Self-Propelled acre 0.89 1.0000 0.89
Furrow Irr. each 3058.64 0.0083 25.49
TOTAL FIXED EXPENSES 52.95
TOTAL SPECIFIED EXPENSES 454.72

31

=== New Page ===

Table 8.B Estimated resource use and costs for field operations, per acre

Corn, Furrow Irrigation, Sandy Loam
Mississippi County, University of Arkansas, 2009
POWER UNIT COST EQUIPMENT COST ALLOC LABOR OPERATING/DURABLE INPUT
OPERATION/ SIZE/ POWER UNIT PERF TIMES (0 rrr rrr rrr rr tcc TOTAL
OPERATING INPUT UNIT SIZE RATE OVER MTH DIRECT FIXED DIRECT FIXED HOURS cost AMOUNT PRICE Cost COsT
--dollars- dollars
Custom App. ac 1.00 Apr 1.0000 5.00 5.00 5.00
85-0-60-24 lb 100.0000 0.74 74.40 74.40
Field Cult & Inc Fld 32' MFWD 190 0.049 1.00 Apr 1.15 1.34 0.41 2.05 0.07 0.70 5.65
Disk Bed (Hipper) 12R-30 MFWD 225 0.062 1.00 Apr 1.74 2.10 0.30 0.94 0.06 0.62 5.70
Plant & Pre-Rigid 12R-30 MFWD 190 0.067 1.00 Apr 1.57 1.83 1.16 2.62 0.13 1.25 8.43
Pioneer 31D59 thous 34.4000 2.80 96.32 96.32
Sprayer( 600-825Gal) 90' 0.011 1.00 May 0.36 0.89 0.01 0.17 1.42
Atrazine qt 2.0000 3.30 6.60 6.60
Glyphosate qt 1.0000 6.50 6.50 6.50
Resolve Q oz 1.2500 7.50 9.38 9.38
Custom App. ac 1.00 Jun 1.0000 5.00 5.00 5.00
Urea lb 325.0000 0.19 61.75 61.75
Amm. Sulfate lb 40.0000 0.19 7.60 7.60
Pipe Spool 160ac 1/4m roll 2WD 130 0.003 1.00 Jun 0.05 0.05 0.01 0.09 0.00 0.08 0.28
Roll-Out Pipe ft 42.6000 0.20 8.52 8.52
Pipe Spool 160ac 1/4m roll 2WD 130 0.003 1.00 Sep 0.05 0.05 0.01 0.09 0.00 0.08 0.28
Header - Corn 8R-30 275hp 0.127 1.00 Sep 6.20 11.77 1.40 2.47 0.12 1.27 23.11
Corn Grain Cart 8R30 500 bu MFWD 190 0.031 1.00 Sep 0.74 0.86 0.15 0.31 0.03 0.32 2.38
Haul Corn bu 131.7600 0.20 26.35 26.35
Corn Checkoff bu 131.7600 0.01 1.32 1.32
Dry Corn bu 131.7600 0.19 25.03 25.03
Furrow Irr. each 1.00 Jun 25.49 0.0083 25.49
Apply Water ac-in Jun 19.69 0.22 1.95 9.0000 21.64
Apply Water ac-in Jul 13.12 0.15 1.30 6.0000 14.42
TOTALS 11.86 18.89 36.25 34.06 0.84 7.74 333.77 442.57
INTEREST ON OPERATING CAPITAL 12.15
UNALLOCATED LABOR 0.00
TOTAL SPECIFIED COST 454.72

32

=== New Page ===

Table 9.A Estimated costs per acre
Corn, Furrow Irrigated, Silt Loam
Monroe County, University of Arkansas, 2009

ITEM UNIT PRICE QUANTITY AMOUNT YOUR FARM
dollars dollars
DIRECT EXPENSES
FERTILIZERS
20.5-14.1-17.6-3.5-.3 lb 0.27 440.0000 121.00
Urea 1b 0.18 375.0000 67.50
FUNGICIDES
Quilt oz 0.77 12.0000 9.24
HERBICIDES
Atrazine qt 3.25 2.0000 6.50
Glyphosate qt 7.00 1.0000 7.00
IRRIGATION SUPPLIES
Roll-Out Pipe ft 0.20 53.3000 10.66
CROP SEED
Pioneer 33M57 thous 3.00 34.0000 102.00
CUSTOM HIRE
Cstm Ap Grd Fert acre 5.50 1.0000 5.50
Custom App. ac 5.52 1.0000 5.52
Custom App. ac 6.00 1.0000 6.00
Aerial App. ac 6.85 2.0000 13.70
Haul Corn bu 0.20 123.1800 24.64
GIN/DRY
Corn Checkoff bu 0.01 123.1800 1.23
Dry Corn bu 0.19 123.1800 23.40
OPERATOR LABOR
Tractors hour 9.92 0.4086 4.06
Harvesters hour 9.92 0.1277 1.27
IRRIGATION LABOR
Implements hour 8.60 0.0125 0.10
Furrow Irr. hour 8.60 0.2262 1.95
HAND LABOR
Implements hour 8.60 0.1139 0.98
DIESEL FUEL
Tractors gal 2.00 5.0045 10.00
Harvesters gal 2.00 1.8070 3.61
Furrow Irr. gal 2.00 9.0000 18.00
REPAIR & MAINTENANCE
Implements acre 5.26 1.0000 5.26
Tractors acre 1.88 1.0000 1.88
Harvesters acre 2.59 1.0000 2.59
Furrow Irr. ac-in 0.18 9.0000 1.68
INTEREST ON OP. CAP. acre 14.80 1.0000 14.80
TOTAL DIRECT EXPENSES 470.59
FIXED EXPENSES
Implements acre 13.43 1.0000 13.43
Tractors acre 13.69 1.0000 13.69
Harvesters acre 11.77 1.0000 11.77
Furrow Irr. each 3058.64 0.0083 25.49
TOTAL FIXED EXPENSES 68.14
TOTAL SPECIFIED EXPENSES 538.73

33

=== New Page ===

Table 9.B Estimated resource use and costs for field operations, per acre
Corn, Furrow Irrigated, Silt Loam
Monroe County, University of Arkansas, 2009

POWER UNIT COST EQUIPMENT COST ALLOC LABOR OPERATING/DURABLE INPUT

OPERATION/ SIZE/ POWER UNIT PERF TIMES (0 rrr rrr rrr rr tcc TOTAL
OPERATING INPUT UNIT SIZE RATE OVER MTH DIRECT FIXED DIRECT FIXED HOURS cost AMOUNT PRICE cost COST
--dollars- dollars
Disk & Incorporate 32' 4WD 400 0.065 1.00 Apr 3.12 3.05 0.86 1.79 0.09 0.93 9.75
Field Cultivate Fld 32' MFWD 300 0.046 1.00 Apr 0.26 1.88 0.32 1.61 4.07
Land Plane 50'x16' MFWD 225 0.151 1.00 Apr 4.20 5.09 0.23 0.70 0.15 1.50 11.72
Field Cultivate Fld 32' MFWD 300 0.046 1.00 Apr 0.26 1.88 0.32 1.61 4.07
Cstm Ap Grd Fert acre 1.00 Apr 1.0000 5.50 5.50 5.50
20.5-14.1-17.6-3.5-.3 1b 440.0000 0.27 121.00 121.00
Bedder/Roller-Fold. 26' MFWD 225 0.072 1.00 Apr 2.00 2.42 0.35 1.10 0.07 0.72 6.59
Plant & Pre-Folding 10R-30 MFWD 170 0.081 1.00 Apr 1.72 2.17 1.61 3.66 0.16 1.51 10.67
Pioneer 33M57 thous 34.0000 3.00 102.00 102.00
Custom App. ac 1.00 May 1.0000 5.52 5.52 5.52
Urea lb 275.0000 0.18 49.50 49.50
Custom App. ac 1.00 May 1.0000 6.00 6.00 6.00
Atrazine qt 2.0000 3.25 6.50 6.50
Glyphosate qt 1.0000 7.00 7.00 7.00
Aerial App. ac 1.00 Jun 1.0000 6.85 6.85 6.85
Urea lb 100.0000 0.18 18.00 18.00
Pipe Spool 160ac 1/4m roll 2WD 130 0.003 1.00 Jun 0.05 0.05 0.01 0.09 0.00 0.08 0.28
Roll-Out Pipe ft 53.3000 0.20 10.66 10.66
Aerial App. ac 1.00 Jul 1.0000 6.85 6.85 6.85
Quilt oz 12.0000 0.77 9.24 9.24
Pipe Spool 160ac 1/4m roll 2WD 130 0.003 1.00 Sep 0.05 0.05 0.01 0.09 0.00 0.08 0.28
Header - Corn 8R-30 275hp 0.127 1.00 Sep 6.20 11.77 1.40 2.47 0.12 1.27 23.11
Corn Grain Cart 8R30 500 bu MFWD 190 0.031 1.00 Sep 0.74 0.86 0.15 0.31 0.03 0.32 2.38
Haul Corn bu 123.1800 0.20 24.64 24.64
Corn Checkoff bu 123.1800 0.01 1.23 1.23
Dry Corn bu 123.1800 0.19 23.40 23.40
Furrow Irr. each 1.00 Jun 25.49 0.0083 25.49
Apply Water ac-in Jun 6.56 0.07 0.65 3.0000 7.21
Apply Water ac-in Jul 13.12 0.15 1.30 6.0000 14.42
TOTALS 18.60 29.22 24.94 38.92 0.88 8.36 403.89 523.93
INTEREST ON OPERATING CAPITAL 14.80
UNALLOCATED LABOR 0.00
TOTAL SPECIFIED COST 538.73

34

=== New Page ===

Table 10.A Estimated costs per acre
Corn, Furrow Irrigated, Silt Loam
Poinsett County, University of Arkansas, 2009

ITEM UNIT PRICE QUANTITY AMOUNT YOUR FARM
dollars dollars
DIRECT EXPENSES
FERTILIZERS
60.4-17.3-43-11.2-5 lbs 0.32 264.0000 84.48
Urea lbs 0.17 300.0000 52.50
FUNGICIDES
Quilt oz 0.77 14.0000 10.78
HERBICIDES
Glyphosate qt 5.50 1.0000 5.50
IRRIGATION SUPPLIES
Roll-Out Pipe ft 0.20 57.9000 11.58
CROP SEED
Pioneer 31D59 thous 3.00 35.0000 105.00
CUSTOM HIRE
Custom App. acre 4.50 2.0000 9.00
Aerial App. acre 7.00 2.0000 14.00
Haul Corn bu 0.20 203.0000 40.60
GIN/DRY
Corn Checkoff bu 0.01 203.0000 2.03
Dry Corn bu 0.19 203.0000 38.57
OPERATOR LABOR
Tractors hour 9.92 0.1852 1.84
Harvesters hour 9.92 0.1277 1.27
Self-Propelled hour 9.92 0.0117 0.12
IRRIGATION LABOR
Implements hour 8.60 0.0125 0.10
Furrow Irr. hour 8.60 0.3771 3.25
HAND LABOR
Implements hour 8.60 0.0314 0.27
Self-Propelled hour 8.60 0.0058 0.05
DIESEL FUEL
Tractors gal 2.00 2.0572 4.11
Harvesters gal 2.00 1.8070 3.61
Self-Propelled gal 2.00 0.1209 0.24
Furrow Irr. gal 2.00 15.0000 30.00
REPAIR & MAINTENANCE
Implements acre 3.78 1.0000 3.78
Tractors acre 0.80 1.0000 0.80
Harvesters acre 2.59 1.0000 2.59
Self-Propelled acre 0.12 1.0000 0.12
Furrow Irr. ac-in 0.18 15.0000 2.81
INTEREST ON OP. CAP. acre 12.93 1.0000 12.93
TOTAL DIRECT EXPENSES 441.93
FIXED EXPENSES
Implements acre 8.66 1.0000 8.66
Tractors acre 5.89 1.0000 5.89
Harvesters acre 11.77 1.0000 11.77
Self-Propelled acre 0.89 1.0000 0.89
Furrow Irr. each 3058.64 0.0083 25.49
TOTAL FIXED EXPENSES 52.70
TOTAL SPECIFIED EXPENSES 494.63

35

=== New Page ===

Table 10.B Estimated resource use and costs for field operations, per acre
Corn, Furrow Irrigated, Silt Loam
Poinsett County, University of Arkansas, 2009

POWER UNIT COST EQUIPMENT COST ALLOC LABOR OPERATING/DURABLE INPUT

OPERATION/ SIZE/ POWER UNIT PERF TIMES (0 rrr rrr rrr rr tcc TOTAL
OPERATING INPUT UNIT SIZE RATE OVER MTH DIRECT FIXED DIRECT FIXED HOURS cost AMOUNT PRICE Cost cost
--dollars- dollars
Cultivate 12R-30 MFWD 225 0.068 1.00 Apr 1.90 2.31 0.52 1.62 0.06 0.68 7.03
Custom App. acre 1.00 Apr 1.0000 4.50 4.50 4.50
60.4-17.3-43-11.2-5 lbs 264.0000 0.32 84.48 84.48
Bedder/Roller-Rigid 40' MFWD 225 0.046 1.00 Apr 1.30 1.57 0.26 0.82 0.04 0.47 4.42
Plant - Folding 24R-30 MFWD 225 0.031 1.00 Apr 0.87 1.05 1.43 3.26 0.06 0.58 7.19
Pioneer 31D59 thous 35.0000 3.00 105.00 105.00
Sprayer( 600-825Gal) 90' 0.011 1.00 Jun 0.36 0.89 0.01 0.17 1.42
Glyphosate qt 1.0000 5.50 5.50 5.50
Custom App. acre 1.00 Jun 1.0000 4.50 4.50 4.50
Urea lbs 200.0000 0.17 35.00 35.00
Aerial App. acre 1.00 Jun 1.0000 7.00 7.00 7.00
Urea lbs 100.0000 0.17 17.50 17.50
Pipe Spool 160ac 1/4m roll 2WD 130 0.003 1.00 Jun 0.05 0.05 0.01 0.09 0.00 0.08 0.28
Roll-Out Pipe ft 57.9000 0.20 11.58 11.58
Aerial App. acre 1.00 Jul 1.0000 7.00 7.00 7.00
Quilt oz 14.0000 0.77 10.78 10.78
Pipe Spool 160ac 1/4m roll 2WD 130 0.003 1.00 Sep 0.05 0.05 0.01 0.09 0.00 0.08 0.28
Header - Corn 8R-30 275hp 0.127 1.00 Sep 6.20 11.77 1.40 2.47 0.12 1.27 23.11
Corn Grain Cart 8R30 500 bu MFWD 190 0.031 1.00 Sep 0.74 0.86 0.15 0.31 0.03 0.32 2.38
Haul Corn bu 203.0000 0.20 40.60 40.60
Corn Checkoff bu 203.0000 0.01 2.03 2.03
Dry Corn bu 203.0000 0.19 38.57 38.57
Furrow Irr. each 1.00 Jun 25.49 0.0083 25.49
Apply Water ac-in Jun 19.69 0.22 1.95 9.0000 21.64
Apply Water ac-in Jul 13.12 0.15 1.30 6.0000 14.42
TOTALS 11.47 18.55 36.59 34.15 0.75 6.90 374.04 481.70
INTEREST ON OPERATING CAPITAL 12.93
UNALLOCATED LABOR 0.00
TOTAL SPECIFIED COST 494,63

36

=== New Page ===

Table 11.A Estimated costs per acre
Corn, Furrow Irrigated, Silt Loam
St. Francis County, University of Arkansas, 2009

ITEM UNIT PRICE QUANTITY AMOUNT YOUR FARM
dollars dollars
DIRECT EXPENSES
FERTILIZERS
85-69-60 1b 0.93 100.0000 93.00
Urea 1b 0.17 350.0000 59.50
Amm. Sulfate 1b 0.17 50.0000 8.75
HERBICIDES
Atrazine qt 4.75 2.5000 11.88
Glyphosate qt 6.95 2.0000 13.90
IRRIGATION SUPPLIES
Roll-Out Pipe ft 0.20 39.6000 7.92
CROP SEED
DeKalb 64-79VT3 thou 3.00 32.0000 96.00
CUSTOM HIRE
Custom App. ac 5.50 2.0000 11.00
Custom App. ac 5.41 2.0000 10.82
Aerial App. ac 6.75 1.0000 6.75
Haul Corn bu 0.20 175.9700 35.19
GIN/DRY
Corn Checkoff bu 0.01 175.9700 1.76
Dry Corn bu 0.19 175.9700 33.43
OPERATOR LABOR
Tractors hour 9.92 0.1358 1.35
Harvesters hour 9.92 0.0851 0.84
IRRIGATION LABOR
Implements hour 8.60 0.0125 0.10
Furrow Irr. hour 8.60 0.4525 3.89
HAND LABOR
Implements hour 8.60 0.0507 0.44
DIESEL FUEL
Tractors gal 2.00 1.4849 2.97
Harvesters gal 2.00 1.4243 2.85
Furrow Irr. gal 2.00 18.0001 36.00
REPAIR & MAINTENANCE
Implements acre 3.85 1.0000 3.85
Tractors acre 0.58 1.0000 0.58
Harvesters acre 2.02 1.0000 2.02
Furrow Irr. ac-in 0.18 18.0000 3.37
INTEREST ON OP. CAP. acre 14.24 1.0000 14.24
TOTAL DIRECT EXPENSES 462.66
FIXED EXPENSES
Implements acre 9.28 1.0000 9.28
Tractors acre 4.23 1.0000 4.23
Harvesters acre 9.19 1.0000 9.19
Furrow Irr. each 3058.64 0.0083 25.48
TOTAL FIXED EXPENSES 50.06
TOTAL SPECIFIED EXPENSES 512.72

37

=== New Page ===

Table 11.B Estimated resource use and costs for field operations, per acre
Corn, Furrow Irrigated, Silt Loam
St. Francis County, University of Arkansas, 2009

POWER UNIT COST EQUIPMENT COST ALLOC LABOR OPERATING/DURABLE INPUT

OPERATION/ SIZE/ POWER UNIT PERF TIMES (0 rrr rrr rrr rr tcc TOTAL
OPERATING INPUT UNIT SIZE RATE OVER MTH DIRECT FIXED DIRECT FIXED HOURS cost AMOUNT PRICE cost COST
--dollars- dollars
Custom App. ac 1.00 Apr 1.0000 5.50 5.50 5.50
85-69-60 lb 100.0000 0.93 93.00 93.00
Field Cultivate Fld 32' MFWD 300 0.046 1.00 Apr 0.26 1.88 0.32 1.61 4.07
Bedder/Roller-Fold. 40' MFWD 225 0.046 1.00 Apr 1.30 1.57 0.33 1.03 0.04 0.47 4.70
Plant & Pre-Rigid 16R30 MFWD 225 0.050 1.00 Apr 1.41 1.70 1.61 3.64 0.10 0.94 9.30
DeKalb 64-79VT3 thou 32.0000 3.00 96.00 96.00
Atrazine qt 1.00 Apr 2.0000 4.75 9.50 9.50
Glyphosate qt 1.0000 6.95 6.95 6.95
Custom App. ac 1.0000 5.41 5.41 5.41
Custom App. ac 1.00 May 1.0000 5.50 5.50 5.50
Urea lb 250.0000 0.17 42.50 42.50
Amm. Sulfate lb 50.0000 0.17 8.75 8.75
Custom App. ac 1.00 May 1.0000 5.41 5.41 5.41
Atrazine qt 0.5000 4.75 2.38 2.38
Glyphosate at 1.0000 6.95 6.95 6.95
Aerial App. ac 1.00 May 1.0000 6.75 6.75 6.75
Urea lb 100.0000 0.17 17.00 17.00
Pipe Spool 160ac 1/4m roll 2WD 130 0.003 1.00 Jun 0.05 0.05 0.01 0.09 0.00 0.08 0.28
Roll-Out Pipe ft 39.6000 0.20 7.92 7.92
Pipe Spool 160ac 1/4m roll 2WD 130 0.003 1.00 Sep 0.05 0.05 0.01 0.09 0.00 0.08 0.28
Header - Corn 12R-30 325hp 0.085 1.00 Sep 4.87 9.19 1.42 2.51 0.08 0.84 18.83
Corn Grain Cart 8R30 500 bu MFWD 190 0.031 1.00 Sep 0.74 0.86 0.15 0.31 0.03 0.32 2.38
Haul Corn bu 175.9700 0.20 35.19 35.19
Corn Checkoff bu 175.9700 0.01 1.76 1.76
Dry Corn bu 175.9700 0.19 33.43 33.43
Furrow Irr. each 1.00 Jun 25.48 0.0083 25.48
Apply Water ac-in Jun 13.12 0.15 1.30 6.0000 14.42
Apply Water ac-in Jul 26.25 0.30 2.59 12.0000 28.84
TOTALS 8.68 15.30 43.22 34.76 0.73 6.62 389.90 498.48
INTEREST ON OPERATING CAPITAL 14.24
UNALLOCATED LABOR 0.00
TOTAL SPECIFIED COST 512.72

38

=== New Page ===

Appendix B

Grain Sorghum:
Economic Analysis by County

Estimated operating expenses and crop input costs

=== New Page ===

Table 12.A Estimated costs per acre
Grain Sorghum, Furrow Irrigated, Silt Loam
Woodruff County, University of Arkansas, 2009

ITEM UNIT PRICE QUANTITY AMOUNT YOUR FARM
dollars dollars
DIRECT EXPENSES
FERTILIZERS
Potash 0-0-60 lbs 0.33 200.0000 66.00
UAN 32% gal 2.00 10.0000 20.00
Urea 1b 0.19 200.0000 38.00
HERBICIDES
Duel pts 13.00 1.3000 16.90
Atrazine qts 3.50 2.0000 7.00
Glyphosate qt 7.00 1.0000 7.00
INSECTICIDES
Karate oz 2.60 1.6000 4.16
IRRIGATION SUPPLIES
Roll-Out Pipe ft 0.20 46.1000 9.22
CROP SEED
Pioneer 84G62 lbs 1.40 8.0000 11.20
CUSTOM HIRE
Custom App. acre 5.00 3.0000 15.00
Aerial App. acre 13.00 1.0000 13.00
Aerial App. acre 6.50 1.0000 6.50
Haul Sorghum bu 0.20 74.0000 14.80
GIN/DRY
Sorghum Checkoff bu 0.01 74.0000 0.74
OPERATOR LABOR
Tractors hour 9.92 0.6659 6.62
Harvesters hour 9.92 0.1161 1.15
IRRIGATION LABOR
Implements hour 8.60 0.0125 0.10
Furrow Irr. hour 8.60 0.1508 1.30
HAND LABOR
Implements hour 8.60 0.1647 1.41
DIESEL FUEL
Tractors gal 2.00 7.6250 15.24
Harvesters gal 2.00 1.6428 3.29
Furrow Irr. gal 2.00 6.0000 12.00
REPAIR & MAINTENANCE
Implements acre 3.92 1.0000 3.92
Tractors acre 3.01 1.0000 3.01
Harvesters acre 2.35 1.0000 2.350
Furrow Irr. ac-in 0.18 6.0000 1.12
INTEREST ON OP. CAP. acre 9.43 1.0000 9.43
TOTAL DIRECT EXPENSES 290.46
FIXED EXPENSES
Implements acre 10.34 1.0000 10.34
Tractors acre 22.02 1.0000 22.02
Harvesters acre 10.70 1.0000 10.70
Furrow Irr. each 3058.64 0.0083 25.49
TOTAL FIXED EXPENSES 68.55
TOTAL SPECIFIED EXPENSES 359.01

40

=== New Page ===

Table 12.B Estimated resource use and costs for field operations, per acre
Grain Sorghum, Furrow Irrigated, Silt Loam
Woodruff County, University of Arkansas, 2009

POWER UNIT COST EQUIPMENT COST ALLOC LABOR OPERATING/DURABLE INPUT

OPERATION/ SIZE/ POWER UNIT PERF TIMES (0 rrr rrr rrr rr tcc TOTAL
OPERATING INPUT UNIT SIZE RATE OVER MTH DIRECT FIXED DIRECT FIXED HOURS cost AMOUNT PRICE Cost COsT
dollars
Disk & Incorporate 28' MFWD 225 0.074 1.00 Apr 2.07 2.51 0.87 1.81 0.11 1.06 8.32
Field Cult & Inc Fld 24' MFWD 225 0.066 1.00 Apr 1.83 2.22 0.41 2.03 0.09 0.94 7.43
Land Plane 50'x16' MFWD 225 0.151 2.00 Apr 8.42 10.17 0.45 1.41 0.30 3.01 23.46
Custom App. acre 1.00 Apr 1.0000 5.00 5.00 5.00
Potash 0-0-60 lbs 200.0000 0.33 66.00 66.00
Bedder/Roller-Fold. 21" MFWD 225 0.089 1.00 Apr 2.48 2.99 0.34 1.06 0.08 0.89 7.76
Grain Drill 20' 4WD 225 0.094 1.00 Apr 2.61 3.17 1.12 2.55 0.18 1.75 11.20
Pioneer 84G62 lbs 8.0000 1.40 11.20 11.20
Custom App. acre 1.00 Apr 1.0000 5.00 5.00 5.00
UAN 32% gal 10.0000 2.00 20.00 20.00
Duel pts 1.3000 13.00 16.90 16.90
Atrazine qts 1.0000 3.50 3.50 3.50
Glyphosate at 1.0000 7.00 7.00 7.00
Aerial App. acre 1.00 May 1.0000 13.00 13.00 13.00
Urea lb 200.0000 0.19 38.00 38.00
Custom App. acre 1.00 May 1.0000 5.00 5.00 5.00
Atrazine qts 1.0000 3.50 3.50 3.50
Pipe Spool 160ac 1/4m roll 2WD 130 0.003 1.00 Jun 0.05 0.05 0.01 0.09 0.00 0.08 0.28
Roll-Out Pipe ft 46.1000 0.20 9.22 9.22
Aerial App. acre 1.00 Jul 1.0000 6.50 6.50 6.50
Karate oz 1.6000 2.60 4.16 4.16
Pipe Spool 160ac 1/4m roll 2WD 130 0.003 1.00 Sep 0.05 0.05 0.01 0.09 0.00 0.08 0.28
Header Wheat/Sorghum 22' Rigid 275hp 0.116 41.00 Sep 5.64 10.70 0.56 0.99 0.11 1.15 19.04
Corn Grain Cart 8R30 500 bu MFWD 190 0.031 1.00 Sep 0.74 0.86 0.15 0.31 0.03 0.32 2.38
Haul Sorghum bu 74.0000 0.20 14.80 14.80
Sorghum Checkoff bu 74.0000 0.01 0.74 0.74
Furrow Irr. each 1.00 Jun 25.49 0.0083 25.49
Apply Water ac-in Jun 6.56 0.07 0.65 3.0000 7.21
Apply Water ac-in Jul 6.56 0.07 0.65 3.0000 7.21
TOTALS 23.89 32.72 17.04 35.83 1.11 10.58 229.52 349.58
INTEREST ON OPERATING CAPITAL 9.43
UNALLOCATED LABOR 0.00
TOTAL SPECIFIED COST 359.01

41