# Document 123522

TION

ECONOMICS & UTILIZA

Soybean Marketing

ie Arkansas soybean marketing system

provides producers with many attractive

alternatives for marketing soybean

production. Arkansas is fortunate to be
located on the Mississippi, Arkansas and White
River waterways which facilitate the movement of
soybeans by barge for export at the Port of New
Orleans. When this export demand for soybeans is
combined with the needs of Arkansas soybean
processors, grain terminals and elevators, the result
is that state producers can generally expect to
receive close to or, in some instances, above soybean
futures prices for their product.

In the United States, the soybean marketing
year begins on September 1 and ends on August 31.
Soybeans produced for the 1998-1999 marketing
year were harvested in fall, 1998. By utilizing cash,
futures or options markets, soybeans may be sold for
at least ten to twelve months prior to harvest and
then eight to ten months after harvest. This results
in nearly a two-year window which is available to
sell soybeans produced in each marketing year
(Figure 17.1).

by D. Neff and N. Smith

The planning period occurs during the winter
months prior to planting. During this time, it is
important to focus on projected costs of production
and price forecasts for the new crop. Costs of
production will be affected by individual farm and
field agronomic and financial characteristics. After
the first of the year, private forecasts of average cash
price for the new crop marketing year (beginning
September 1) become available. The USDA price
forecasts for the new crop year are available in the
May Crop Production Report. These price forecasts
can be compared with new crop forward contract
prices and new crop (November) futures. If these
price levels are high relative to season average price
projections and projected costs of production, pricing
or sales using cash, futures or options may be
appropriate for a portion of the soybean crop to be
grown.

At planting time and during the growing
season, it is important to focus on costs of
production, season average cash price forecasts,
forward and futures prices and local basis levels.
There are a number of different ways to price or sell

Figure 17.1 . Example of a 20-Month S oybean Marketing Period.

planning planting

harvest

storage final sales

20 months

new crop (forwad) sales

——

old gop (storage) sales

=== New Page ===

new crop production prior to harvest using cash,
futures or options markets. These methods include:

1.

Cash Forward Contracts — Private contracts
with cash buyers (elevators, processors, etc.)
which specify the quantity, quality, location and
time of delivery of new crop soybean production.
The price which is received is the buyer’s
current forward price for soybeans.

Hedge-to-Arrive or Short Futures Hedge —
A hedge-to-arrive contract fixes a price level for
the new crop production. The price which is
agreed upon is associated with a particular
futures contract (e.g., November soybean
futures). The producer must set the basis later.
This type of cash contract is similar to a short
futures hedge. With a short futures hedge,
producers sell futures using a commodity broker.
Later, the production is priced and the basis is
set.

Basis Contract - A basis contract fixes the
basis (but not price) at the time the contract is
made. After harvest, basis contracts usually
provide for a cash advance after the soybeans
are delivered. The price level must be set prior to
a specified date in the contract.

Floor-Price-to-Arrive or Long Put Hedge -—
A floor-price-to-arrive contract sets a price floor
for the new crop production. The contract
involves purchasing a soybean futures put
option and the price floor will be below the
current forward price by approximately the cost
of the put. If prices decrease, the price which is
received will be equal to the price floor. If prices
increase, however, the producer is still able to
sell at a higher price. A floor-price-to-arrive
contract is similar to a producer purchasing a
near-the-money put option from a commodity
broker.

Minimum Price or Long Call Hedge - A
minimum price contract sets a minimum price
for the soybeans somewhere below the forward
contract price. The difference is approximately
the price of a near-the-money soybean futures
call option. The minimum price is received upon
delivery and then, if prices increase, additional
money is received for the production when the

price is set. If prices decrease, the producer
receives the minimum price only. This type of
cash contract is the same as a producer selling
the production, then “buying it back” by
purchasing a soybean futures call option from a
commodity broker. If prices increase, the option
becomes more valuable and is sold for an addi-
tional profit on the production. If prices
decrease, the premium, or price paid, for the
option is the maximum loss.

6. Mini-Max or Bull Call Spread — A mini-max
contract sets both a minimum and a maximum
price that will be received for the new crop
production. The minimum price is higher than
that which would be received from a minimum
price contract. However, this increase comes at a
cost - the maximum price which could be
received is lower than that of a minimum price
contract. An equivalent strategy which a
producer could do using a commodities broker is
to first sell or price the crop locally and then
purchase an at-the-money or near-the-money
soybean futures call and sell a higher strike call
option. This also establishes a minimum and
maximum price for the production.

When production is priced or sold forward prior
to harvest, care should be taken to ensure that the
production will actually be produced. A general
guideline is that no more than 30 percent of
expected production should be priced forward to
allow for the possibility of low yields. Producers with
soybeans in higher-risk areas (e.g., flood plains)
should price less than this. Producers producing
soybeans under irrigation could perhaps price more
than this.

Each month, USDA and private firms update
soybean supply and demand estimates. This involves
new projections of supply (production and stocks)
and usage (crush, exports and seed). This also
implies new projections of ending stocks and the
season average price. Producers should follow
updates as they occur in order to be knowledgeable
about realistic price goals for soybean production.

At harvest, decisions must be made about
storing all or a portion of the crop. Again, current
USDA or private predictions of average price should
be considered and compared with current cash
forward and futures prices.

VZTILLN *3 SOIWONO 94

OLL

N

=== New Page ===

TION

ECONOMICS & UTILIZA

Figure 17.2 . Average Monthly N ew Crop (November) Futures P rices (from December to November),
Then Old C rop Cash Prices (December to July) , 1978 to 1997 Mar keting Season s.

Cents/bu.

680

660

640

620

600
o 2@M@ ee rye 2 Ht Oar SD go eer a2z 2
w Ww ao « 2 Ww Oo 2
HSHSe SSS 28 SSeS EEE ESB

Month

Historically, the average price of soybeans is at
its lowest yearly level during and immediately after
harvest. Figure 17.2 shows average monthly prices
of new crop futures (prior to harvest), then old crop
cash prices (after harvest). Although there is
considerable variability from year to year, forward
prices for soybeans have dropped an average of
about $0.30/bu. from planting to the end of the year.
After that, cash prices for stored soybeans have
risen on average by about $0.30/bu., an indication of
the returns to storage.

After harvest during the storage period, it is
again important to monitor USDA or private predic-
tions of average price. Comparisons with current
cash forward and futures prices should be made and
the costs of storage should be considered.

Over the past 20 years, the period average price
of soybeans for a particular marketing year was in
the top third of its price range 42 percent of the time
during the planning season (Table 17.1). It also
was in the bottom third 42 percent of the time. So,

forward sales prior to planting had about an equal
chance of receiving the high or low price for that
year’s crop.

During planting and the growing season, the
period average price traded in the middle third of
the season average price range more than 50
percent of the time. Forward sales during this time
period had a better-than-average chance of receiving
an average soybean price and about an equal (but
lower) chance of selling at the high or low price.

At harvest and during the winter months,
the average price for this period was never in the top
third of the season average price range. In fact, the
average price during this period was in the bottom
third of the season average price range 63 percent of
the time. Harvest sales and sales during the four to
five months following harvest had a very high
chance of receiving low prices for soybeans.

Soybeans stored and then sold in the spring
and summer period when the new crop is being
planted and grown had about a 42 percent chance of

=== New Page ===

Table 17.1. Percent of Time th e Average Soybean Price for the Period Was in th e Top, Middle
and Botto m Third of the Seaso n Average Price Range, 1978 to 1996 C rops

Season Average Price Range
Period Months
Top Third Middle Third Bottom Third

cree --- Percent --------
Planning December to March 42 16 42
Planting and Growing April to September 21 53 26
Harvest and Winter October to March ie) 37 63
Spring and Summer April to July 26 42 32

being sold in the middle third of the season average
price range. Twenty-six percent of the time prices
averaged in the top third, and 32 percent of the time
they were in the bottom third.

Domestic and world supply and demand factors
for each soybean crop changed each year and during
each year. Very few years are “alike,” and it is
difficult to predict when prices will be high relative
to their season average price from past price data.
However, it is apparent from Table 17.1 that in the
past 20 years harvest and post-harvest sales
resulted in lower-than-average prices being
received. Storage is one way to offset this problem.
However, it is not a viable option for all producers
because, in many cases, soybean sales are necessary
due to lack of storage or to pay expenses. Producers
could consider basis, minimum price or mini-max
contracts as alternatives. These contracts allow the
grain to be delivered at harvest. A cash advance or
minimum price is received which can be used to
meet expenses.

Another way to circumvent harvest sales is to
use forward sales, hedge-to-arrive or floor-price-to-
arrive contracts. Forward contracts and hedge-to-
arrive contracts allow price or both price and basis
to be set for an agreed-upon amount of production. A
floor-price-to-arrive contract establishes a minimum
price for the production and also allows possible
price increases to be received.

During the four different periods discussed
above, there are many alternatives and oppor-
tunities for marketing soybeans. Producers should

reserve some time each week (or more often) to
devote to analyzing current and potential marketing
opportunities. Important information for producers
can come from at least four sources:

1. Marketing meetings hosted by private firms
or the Cooperative Extension Service.
Educational meetings offer the latest informa-
tion and provide important reference materials.

2. Price and other marketing information
from farm magazines, marketing services or
other media sources. Concentrate on three to
five sources and check them regularly for
current information.

3. Local cash contract alternatives available at
elevators, processors or other cash commodity
buyers. It is important to know where and what
cash contracts are available and how they may
be used when needed.

4. Opinions from other soybean producers on
current and future price and marketing
alternatives/opportunities. Consider forming or
joining a soybean marketing club to regularly
discuss soybean marketing with other
producers.

We arein a highly volatile period of agricultural
production. Demand was strong and supply was low
in the 1995 and 1996 crops. However, the 1997 and
1998 soybean crops were large, and ending stocks
are projected to be higher than the previous two

VZTILLN *3 SOIWONO 94

OLL

N

=== New Page ===

TION

ECONOMICS & UTILIZA

Figure 17.3 . Monthl y Average Cash Soybean Price, Decembe, 1978 to Decembea,, 1997.

Cents/bu.

900

800

700

N
ar N

aN

600 ys IG

\] V y

500

400
of Oo rer XN Om tf © ©D HR OW HR OFT NM FH OH
i oO LJ CJ ao oO oO oO oO J eo a a o no n a oO a
Se © ee © © ee © ee © De © ee © De © © De © ee © De © De © De © De © oe © ee © ee © ee ©)
ond edwawmdetoawdmamawouw ma mwuw ww
(— > = > ee = ee = ee = ee = = = = = > ~ ~~ |

Month/Year

years. Historically, cash prices have been above
$7.00/bu. for soybeans at only six different periods
over the last 20 years (Figure 17.3). Two of these
periods have been in the last three years.

The price of soybeans grown in the United
States is heavily dependent upon supply and
demand factors in the rest of the world. Nearly a

third of the U.S. soybean crop is exported each year.

Soybean production in the rest of the world
(particularly in South America) greatly affects the
demand for U.S. soybean exports. These changes in
world supply, combined with changes in world
demand (particularly in Asia, Europe and Mexico),
are important influences on U.S. soybean prices.

As each soybean crop is marketed, it is
important to keep abreast of current price infor-
mation and projections. This information, when
compared with the costs of production and storage,
forms the foundation of producer marketing
decisions. Keep in mind four things when making
marketing and sales plans:

1. Know your costs of production and storage
in order to compare to current and projected
market prices.

2. Havea price objective and sell (pull the
trigger) when it is met.

3. Revise and review at least weekly all cost
and price information in order to update the
soybean marketing plan.

4. Avoid emotional marketing decisions which
cause decisions to be delayed or changed.

Remember, the market does not care what your
costs are. Only you, as a farm producer, can make
the appropriate decisions to sell your soybean
production according to your costs and your
expectations about future price opportunities.