# Document 123549

VA Arkansas | 3
ROW CROP

DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE VERIFICATION Be
RESEARCH & EXTENSION UA seoeeee " “

University of Arkansas System

Corn and Grain Sorghum Weekly Update — July 29, 2022

Division of Agriculture, University of Arkansas System, Cooperative Extension Service
By: Chuck Capps, Verification Coordinator — Corn & Grain Sorghum

General Information

Irrigation has been terminated in both Desha County fields for a week and Prairie County will be irrigated for the last
time this week. We are utilizing soil moisture censors placed at depths of 6”, 12”, 18”, and 30”. These sensors are
attached to an AgSense telemetry unit that allows us to be updated on soil moisture status in real time through the
AgSense phone app. We utilize the AR Soil Calc app to input the soil moisture sensor data along with other info utilized
by the app to determine irrigation date. The AR Soil Calc app is also very useful in helping us to know how many inches
of water is needed to finish the crop and terminate irrigation.

We found Southern Rust in Desha County field II on a couple of leaves last week and in Faulkner County on about 20
leaves this week. The Desha County field was only a few days from black layer and Faulkner County not far from dent. All
fields are far enough long that we should not have to worry at this point.

Table 1.
County Hybrid Heat Crop Field Notes
Units Stage
Desha | DeKalb DKC 2851 R5 90% | The field was at 90% starch on 7/26.
67-94 Starch
Desha Il AgriGold 2868 R5 95% | The field was at 95% starch on 7/26.
6544VT2P Starch
Faulkner Local LC1987 2258 R4 The soil profile according to sensors contains 0.70” of water
VT2P and needs 5.0” of water to finish the crop.
Independence Dyna-Gro 2215 R4 The soil profile according to sensors contains 1.28” of water
D57CC51 and needs 5.0” of water to finish the crop.
Jefferson Progeny 2473 | R5 35% | The soil profile according to sensors contains 1.59” of water
PGY9117VT2P Starch | and needs 2.2” of water to finish the crop.
Lonoke DeKalb 2337 | RS 20% | The soil profile according to sensors contains 0.51” of water
DKC 65-95 Starch | and needs 3.7” of water to finish the crop.
Monroe BH 8721VT2P | 2025 R4 The soil profile according to sensors contains 1.44” of water
and needs 7.5” of water to finish the crop.
Poinsett Pioneer 2218 R4 The soil profile according to sensors contains 2.02” of water
P1847VYHR and needs 6.0” of water to finish the crop.
Prairie DeKalb 2562 | R5 40% | The soil profile according to sensors contains 0.27” of water
DKC 70-27 Starch | and needs 2.2” of water to finish the crop.