# Document 123551

if Arkansas a
| p A ROW CROP |

DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE VERIFICATION —.

RESEARCH & EXTENSION
UVA® .

University of Arkansas System

ON OF AGRICULTURE

Corn and Grain Sorghum Weekly Update — July 21, 2023

Division of Agriculture, University of Arkansas System, Cooperative Extension Service
By: Chuck Capps, Verification Coordinator — Corn & Grain Sorghum

General Information

As seen in Table 1 below, heat units and crop stage along with a few notes about field activities are listed for each
location. Weather data is collected at the weather station placed at each individual field. We are utilizing AgSense
telemetry units with soil moisture sensors placed at 6, 12, 18, and 30 inch to collect soil moisture data. We input this
data to the AR Soil Calc app to initiate irrigations.

The Corn & Grain Sorghum Research Verification Program fields are moving toward maturity quickly with all fields being
at least R4 and a few at RS. The fields at the R4 growth stage are within a few days of reaching R5. We have terminated

irrigation in the Drew County field and the Jefferson County field only needing 1 inch of water to finish the crop.

Southern rust has been found in SE Arkansas, but most all of the corn in the area are well beyond the growth stage that

would require a fungicide application. All of the Corn Verification fields are beyond the growth stage we would
recommend treating for Southern rust.

Table 1.
County Heat Crop Field Notes
Units Stage

Clark 2133 R4 The field is very close to reaching R5. 4.3” of rainfall.

Clay 2265 R5 The field has reached R5 and was being irrigated Monday 7/17. 0.52” of
rainfall.

Drew 2556 RS The field is a little over 60% starch in the kernels and has 1.78” of available
soil moisture, so irrigation has been terminated.

Faulkner 2226 R5 The field has reached RS. Being irrigated with center pivot, field will need at
least 2 more irrigations. 2.73” of rainfall.

Independence 2181 R4 The field is very close to R5. 0.53” of rainfall.

Jefferson 2373 R5 The field is 40% starch in the kernels and has 1.59” of available soil moisture.
The Soil Calc app is showing the field needs 2.5” of water to finish the crop.
So an inch of rain or quick irrigation would finish the crop.

Lonoke 2206 R5 The field has over 50% damage from complete plant lodging and plants
snapping right below the ear. 0.81” of rainfall.

Mississippi 2365 R5 The field is 30% starch in the kernels and has 0.99” of available soil moisture.
The Soil Calc app is showing the field needs 3.2” of water to finish the crop.
2.2” of rain or one irrigation assuming 70% efficiency or greater would finish
the crop.

White 2174 R4 The field is very close to RS. 0.82” of rainfall.