# Document 123682

Wh

DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE
RESEARCH & EXTENSION

University of Arkansas System

2018

University of Arkansas
Division of Agriculture
Wheat Research Verification Program

The Wheat Research Verification Program
is funded by Arkansas wheat producers
through check-off funds administered by
the Arkansas Wheat Promotion Board.

University of Arkansas

Cooperative Extension Service
Agriculture Experiment Station

US. Department of Agriculture

And County Governments Cooperating

The University of Arkansas System Division of Agriculture
offers all its Extension and Research programs to all
eligible persons regardless of race, color, sex, gender
identity, sexual orientation, national origin, religion, age,
disability, marital or veteran status, genetic information, or
any other legally protected status, and is an Affirmative
Action/Equal Opportunity Employer.

Arkansas ——
ROW CROP wee

VERIFICATION | 75.::::

DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE
Ut RESEARCH & EXTENSION Ns
University of Arkansas System =

Arkansas

V We aT

Wi f’ WHEAT

PROMOTION BOARD

=== New Page ===

Table of Contents

Authors and Acknowledgements ................ececececec ec ee ecec teen eneneaeneeenenenenes Page 2
Tntroduction 2.0.0.0... cece eee ec ne ec ee eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee eens ee eeeseaeaeeeneneneneneneneneneneees Page 3
Figure 1. Location of 2017 Wheat Research Verification Program Fields ............ Page 5
Field Reviews ...........ccccecececeeeeneneeeeeneneeeneneneeeeeeeneneeeeeeeeeeseeeaeaeaeeenenens Page 6
Table 1. General Agronomic Information ........... 00... ceeee cence cee eee eee eee en eens Page 8
Table 2. Soil Type and Fertilizer Inputs ............. ccc ce eee ee eee eeeeenee eee ens Page 8
Table 3. Pesticide Information ............... 0c cece cece cece cence cece een ee tence tensa eases Page 9
Economic Analysis ............scececececeeeeneeeneeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaeaenenenenenenenes Page 10
Table 4. Operating Costs, Total Costs, and Returns ................c cee ceeee eee ee eee eens Page 11
Table 5. Summary of Revenue and Expenses per Acre ................seeeeeee eee ee eee Page 12

=== New Page ===

Authors and Acknowledgements
Conducted by:

Chris Elkins, Program Associate

Chad Norton, Program Associate

Dr. Jason Kelley, Extension Agronomist - Wheat and Feed Grains
Breana Watkins, Program Associate- Economist

Acknowledgments:

Cooperating Wheat Producers:

Scott Young- Ashley County Dustin Faulkner- Poinsett County
Derek Boling- Clay County

Arlon Woodruff- Craighead County

Tim Gannon- Monroe County

Cooperating County Extension Agents:

Kevin Norton - Ashley County Craig Allen- Poinsett County
Allison Howell- Clay County

Chris Grimes - Craighead County

Andrew Sayger- Monroe County

Cooperative Extension Service:

Dr. Trent Roberts, Soil Fertility

Dr. Leo Espinoza, Extension Soils Specialist

Dr. Glenn Studebaker, Extension Entomologist

Dr. Terry Spurlock, Extension Plant Pathologist

Dr. Gus Lorenz, Extension Entomologist

Dr. Bob Scott, Extension Weed Scientist

Mr. Chris Meux, Extension Design Specialist

Dr. Robert Bacon, Department Head, Department of Crop, Soil, and Environmental Sciences

Agricultural Experiment Station:
Dr. Esten Mason, Assistant Professor, Wheat Breeding and Genetics

Arkansas Wheat Promotion Board Members:

Kenny Clark Jack Evans John Hamilton
Dusty Hoskyn Jackie Prince Tony Schwarz
Tim Smith Blake Swears David Wallace

=== New Page ===

Introduction

The Wheat Research Verification Program (WRVP) represents an interdisciplinary effort
of farmers, county Extension agents, Extension specialists, and researchers committed to
improving the profitability of wheat production in Arkansas. The WRVP program began in 1986
under the direction of the University of Arkansas Cooperative Extension Service. The Arkansas
Wheat Promotion Board has allocated the funding necessary for the WRVP program each year
since its inception.

The WRVP program is designed as on-farm demonstrations of all the research-based
recommendations required to grow wheat profitably in Arkansas. The WRVP program is part of
the University of Arkansas Extension Service's goal of helping wheat producers make
economical, agronomical, and environmentally sound decisions on their farms. The specific
objectives of the program are:

1. To verify research-based recommendations for profitable wheat production in all
wheat producing areas of Arkansas.

2. To develop a database for economic analysis of all aspects of wheat production to
demonstrate that consistently high yields of wheat can be produced economically.

3. To identify specific problems and opportunities in Arkansas wheat production for
further investigation.

4. To promote timely cultural and management practices among all wheat farmers.

To provide training and assistance to county agents with limited expertise in wheat

production.

Nn

Five producer fields were enrolled in the WRVP for the 2017-2018 growing season.
Cooperators from the counties selected varieties from a short list provided by the agent and
research verification coordinator. These varieties were selected based upon multi-year
performance and characteristics determined by the University of Arkansas wheat variety testing
program.

Soil types for fields enrolled in the program ranged from sandy loam to silt loam, with
previous crops of soybean and corn. Fields were planted from mid-October to late-October with
seeding rates ranging from 100-120lbs drilled. No fields were treated for insects throughout the
growing season. The Clay and Poinsett County fields were sprayed with a fungicide to control
foliar diseases. The Ashley and Monroe County fields were sprayed with a fungicide as a
preventative for fusarium head scab. The Clay, Craighead, Poinsett, and Monroe fields were
treated with herbicides to control ryegrass or broadleaf winter weeds. Yields from verification
fields ranged from 53.7 bushels/acre in Craighead County to 99.3 bushels/acre in Ashely County.

The 2017-2018 Arkansas wheat production season started off with a relatively dry and
warm fall, but most areas received adequate rainfall to get timely wheat emergence. Frequent
light showers and mild temperatures helped to keep growing conditions favorable and good
tillering was observed prior to winter dormancy. The winter was colder than in past years and

=== New Page ===

the cool temperatures continued into spring greenup. February was unusually cold and wet with
many areas receiving flooding rains that resulted in saturated soil conditions that hampered
growth and delayed fertilizer and herbicide applications on many fields. A late freeze on the first
week of April caused some levels of freeze damage, depending on region of the state and growth
stage of the wheat at the time of the freeze with areas in the central portion of the state
experiencing the greatest level of freeze damage. Foliar disease levels were generally low for
leaf and stripe rust, but with adequate rainfall the potential for Fusarium Head Scab warranted
preventative treatment on several fields. Despite being wet for most of the growing season, May
brought near record warm and dry conditions that shorted grain fill duration, but resulted in good
grain quality this year. With warm and dry weather, harvest started in late May in Southern
Arkansas and was completed by late June in Northeast Arkansas. Arkansas producers planted an
estimated 180,000 acres of wheat in the fall of 2017 with a statewide estimated yield of 56
bushel/acre. The verification program average yield for the 2017-2018 season was 69
bushels/acre.

The Wheat Research Verification Program continues to demonstrate that Extension’s
research-based recommendations can produce profitable, high yielding wheat across a wide
range of conditions and soil types. Over a 30 year period, the WRVP has averaged
approximately 13 bushels above the average state yield. The program is funded by wheat check-
off dollars and is administered through the Arkansas Wheat Promotion Board.

=== New Page ===

Figure 1. Locations of 2017-2018 Wheat Research Verification Program Fields

Clay County

Craighead County

| Poinsett County

Ashley County

50KM 50 Miles

=== New Page ===

Field Reviews
Southern Fields - Chad Norton

Ashley County

The 80 acre field with a McGehee and Arkabutla silt loam soil type, was located east of
Hamburg and followed corn. Following land preparation and a fertilizer application of 0-50-90,
according to soil test recommendations, the field was drill seeded on October 15, 2017 with
Pioneer 26R41 with Cruiser 5FS seed treatment, at 120 pounds/acre. It emerged on October 22,
2017 to a stand of 25 plants/ft?. No herbicide applications were warranted for weed control.
Initial early spring fertilizer application of 100 pounds DAP plus 50 pounds ammonium sulfate
plus 100 pounds urea per acre was applied January 31, 2018. Second spring fertilizer application
of 100 pounds urea/acre was applied March 5, 2018 for a total spring N rate of 120 pounds/acre.
Second nitrogen application was delayed due to standing water and extremely wet soil conditions
from heavy February rains. On April 12, 2018 a fungicide application of 8 ounces/acre Prosaro
was applied as a preventative for head scab. The field was harvested on May 28, 2018 yielding
99.25 bushels/acre adjusted to 13.5% moisture.

Monroe County

The 33 acre field with a Foley-Calhoun-Bonn complex soil, was located northeast of
Holly Grove and followed soybeans. Following a fertilizer application of 0-90-120, according to
soil test recommendations, the field was drill seeded on October 24, 2017 with AGS 2038 with
Cruiser 5FS seed treatment, at 110 pounds/acre. It emerged November 5, 2017 to a stand of 19
plants/ft?. During January the field was severely grazed by geese. On February 1, 2018 the initial
early spring fertilizer application of 100 pounds/acre ammonium sulfate was applied. In the next
couple of weeks after the initial fertilizer application, the field was again grazed by geese.
Harmony Extra at 0.9 ounces/acre was applied as a post-emergence herbicide for broadleaf weed
control on March 7, 2018. Second fertilizer application of 130 pounds urea/acre was applied
March 8, 2018 and third fertilizer application of 50 pounds DAP plus 110 pounds urea per acre
was applied March 15, 2018 for a total spring N rate of 140 pounds/acre. Second and third
fertilizer applications were severely delayed due to extremely saturated soil conditions from
heavy February rain. In addition, freezing temperatures the last couple weeks in March and first
couple weeks in April resulted in noticeable freeze damage to heads that did result in a yield
reduction. On April 30, 2018 a fungicide application of 8 ounces per acre Prosaro was used as a
preventative for head scab. The field was harvested June 11, 2018 yielding 59.7 bushels/acre
adjusted to 13.5% moisture.

=== New Page ===

Northern Fields — Chris Elkins

Clay County

The 76 acre field with Dundee and Foley Silt Loam soils, was located west of McDougal
and followed corn. Following land preparation and a fertilizer application of 0-50-80, according
to soil sample recommendations, the field was drill seeded on October 30, 2017 with Armor
Havoc with Vibrance Extreme seed treatment, at 120 pounds/acre. Emergence occurred on
November 8, 2017 and had a stand of 32 plants/ft?. On March 17, 2018, Harmony Extra at 0.75
ounces/acre was applied as a post-emergence herbicide for broadleaf weed control. The initial
early spring fertilizer application of 75 pounds ammonium sulfate plus 75 pounds urea/acre was
applied March 9, 2018. The second fertilizer application of 160 pounds urea/acre was applied
March 16, 2018, for a total spring N rate of 124 pounds/acre. Early spring nitrogen applications
were made later due to excess rains and flooding during the month of February. On May 4, 2018,
4oz Tilt was applied for control of Septoria Tritici Blotch. The field was harvested on June 26,
2018 yielding 58.0 bushel/acre.

Craighead County

The 147 acre field with a Beulah Fine Sandy Loam soil, was located 3 miles south of
Lake City and followed soybeans. The field was drilled seeded on October 13, 2017 with Pioneer
26R41 at 100 pounds/acre. The field emerged on October 19, 2017 to a stand of 23 plants/ft?. On
October 20, 2017 a fertilizer application of 0-0-90 was applied, according to soil sample
recommendations. The initial early spring fertilizer application of 75 pounds ammonium sulfate
plus 75 pounds urea/acre was applied February 19, 2018. On March 12, 2018, Harmony Extra at
0.9 ounces/acre was applied as a post-emergence herbicide for broadleaf control. The second
fertilizer application of 115 pounds urea/acre was applied March 14, 2018. Several areas of the
field remained wet during late spring and delayed herbicide and second fertilizer application
timing. Disease and insect pressure remained low and did not reach treatment threshold. The
field was harvest on June 6, 2018 yielding 53.7 bushels/acre adjusted to 13.5% moisture.

Poinsett County

The 66 acre field with a Falaya Silt Loam soil type, was located 5 miles east of
Harrisburg and followed soybeans. Following land preparation and a fertilizer application of 0-
60-90, according to soils sample recommendations, the field was drill seeded on October 20,
2017 with Dyno Gro 9012 with Cruiser 5FS seed treatment, at 106 pounds/acre. On October 23,
2017 an application of 32 ounce generic glyphosate and 1.5 ounce Zidua was applied as a
delayed pre-emerge for ryegrass control. Wheat emerged on October 31, 2017 to a stand of 21
plants/ft?. On November 17, 2017, 16.4 ounces Axial XL was applied as a 100 feet field border
treatment for ryegrass control. The initial early spring fertilizer application of 50 pounds
ammonium sulfate and 50 pounds of urea/acre was applied February 5, 2018. Second and third
spring fertilizer applications of 100 pounds/acre urea each were applied February 17, 2018 and
March 16, 2018 respectively, for a total spring N rate of 126 pounds/acre. Excellent field
drainage allowed for timely fertilizer application. On April 27, 2018 10.5 ounces/acre
Azoxyprop Xtra was applied for the control of Septoria Tritici Blotch. The field was harvested
on June 4, 2018 yielding 73.2 bushels/acre adjusted to 13.5% moisture.

=== New Page ===

Tablel. General Agronomic Information of Verification Fields in 2017-2018.

Planting
County Variety Acres Method Planting Previous | Yield Bu/a
and Rate Date Crop
Ashley Pioneer 80 Drill 120 Oct. 15 Cor 99.3
26R41 Ibs/A
Clay Armor 76 Drill Oct. 30 Cor 58.0
Havoc 120]bs/A
Craighead Pioneer 147 Drill Oct. 13 Soybean 53.7
26R41 1001bs/A
Monroe AGS 2038 33 Drill Oct. 24 Soybean 59.7
110]bs/A
Poinsett Dyna-Gro 66 Drill Oct. 20 Soybean 73.2
9012 106lbs/A
Average 68.8bu/A

Table 2. Soil Type and Fertilizer Inputs for 2017-2018 Wheat Verification Fields.

Total
County Soil Type Fall Spring Fertilizer Spring
Fertilizer Nitrogen
Calhoun & Jan. 31 — 100lbs. DAP +
Ashley Arkabutla silt loam 0-50-90 100lbs. Urea + S50lbs. 120
Ammonium Sulfate
Mar. 5 — 100lbs. Urea
Dundee/Foley Silt 0-50-80 Mar. 9 — 75lbs Ammonium
Clay Loam Sulfate + 75lbs Urea 124
Mar.16 — 160lbs. Urea
Beulah Fine Sandy 0-0-90 Feb. 19- 75lbs. Ammonium
Craighead Loam Sulfate + 75lbs Urea 103
Mar. 14 — 115lbs. Urea
Monroe Foley-Calhoun- 0-90-120 Feb.1 — 100lbs. Ammonium
Bonn Complex Sulfate 140
Mar. 8 — 130lbs. Urea
Mar. 15- 50lbs. DAP
+110lbs Urea
Falaya Silt Loam 0-60-90 Feb. 5 — 50lbs Ammonium
Poinsett Sulfate + 501bs Urea 126
Feb. 17 — 100lbs Urea
March 16 — 100lbs Urea
Average 123 lbs N

=== New Page ===

Table 3. Pesticide Information for the 2017-2018 Wheat Verification Fields.

County Herbicide Insecticide Fungicide

Ashley - - Apr. 12-8 oz/A
Prosaro

Clay March 17- .750z/A Harmony Extra + 1% - May 4- 4 0z/A
NIS Tilt
Craighead | March 12- 9 oz/A Harmony Extra + 1 %NIS -

Monroe March 7 -.90z Harmony Extra + 1% NIS - Apr. 30- 8 0z/A
Prosaro

Poinsett Oct. 22 -320z Generic Glyphosate, | .50z - Apr. 27 — 10.5 oz/A

Zidua Azoxyprop Xtra

Nov 17(Border only)-16.4 oz Axial X1,

=== New Page ===

Economic Analysis of the 2018 Wheat Research Verification Program

This section reports information on costs and returns for the 2018 Wheat Research
Verification Program (WRVP). Records of field operations on each field are the basis for
estimating these costs. The field records were compiled by the WRVP coordinators, county
Extension agents, and cooperators. Production data from the 5 fields were applied to determine
costs and returns above operating costs, as well as total specified costs. Operating costs per
bushel and total costs per bushel indicate the commodity price needed to meet each costs type.

Production expenses are those expenditures that would generally require annual cash outlays and
would be included on an annual operating loan application. Actual quantities of all production
inputs as reported by the cooperators are used in this analysis. Input prices are determined by
data from the 2017 Crop Enterprise Budgets published by the Cooperative Extension Service.
Fuel and repair costs for machinery are calculated using a budget calculator based on parameters
and standards established by the American Society of Agricultural and Biological Engineers.
Machinery repair and maintenance costs should be regarded as estimated values, and actual cash
outlays could differ as producers utilize employee labor for equipment maintenance.

Ownership costs of machinery are determined by a capital recovery method which determines
the amount of money that should be set aside each year to replace the value of equipment used in
production. Machinery costs are estimated by applying engineering formulas to representative
prices of new equipment. This measure differs from typical depreciation methods, as well as
actual annual cash expenses for machinery.

Operating costs, total costs, costs per bushel, and returns are presented in Table 1. Costs in this
report do not include land costs, management, or other expenses and fees not associated with
production. Budget summaries for wheat are presented in Table 2. Price received for wheat of
$5.00/bu. is determined by the Arkansas average cash price during the reported harvest period of
the WRVP fields. Average wheat yield is 68.77 bu. per acre.

Average operating costs for wheat in Table 1 are $244.17 per acre. Table 2 indicates that
fertilizers and nutrients are the largest expense category at $90.93 per acre, or 37% of total
production expenses. Seed costs average $37.25 per acre, and fungicides average $10.07 per
acre. One field, Craighead, had no fungicides applied.

With average yield of 68.77 bu. per acre, average operating costs are $3.67/bu. Operating costs
range from a low of $188.83 per acre in Craighead County to a high of $293.96 per acre in the
Monroe County field. Returns to operating costs average $99.68 per acre. The low is $4.54 in
Monroe County, and the high is $220.82 in Ashley County. Average fixed costs are $50.75 per
acre which leads to average total costs of $294.93 per acre. Returns to total costs average $48.92
per acre with a low of -$29.82 in Monroe County and a high of $150.90 in Ashley County. Total
specified costs average $4.42/bu.

10

=== New Page ===

Table 1. 2018 Operating Costs, Total Costs, and Returns

Operating Operating Costs Returns to Total Total Returns to Total Costs

Field Costs per Bushel Operating Costs _ Fixed Costs _Costs!__ Total Costs _ per Bushel
Ashley 275 43 2.78 220.82 69.92 345.35 150.90 3.48
Clay 228.75 3.94 61.25 55.68 284.42 5.58 4.90
Craighead 188.83 3.52 79.67 46.42 235.25 33.25 4.38
Monroe 293.96 4.92 4.54 34.36 328.32 -29.82 5.50
Poinsett 233.90 3.20 132.10 47.39 281.29 84.71 3.84
Average 244.17 3.67 99.68 50.75 294.93 48.92 4.42

‘Does not include land costs, management, or other expenses and fees not associated with production.

11

=== New Page ===

Table 2.2018 Revenue and Expenses per Acre

Field

Revenue Ashley Clay Craighead Monroe __Poinsett Average
Yield (bu.) 99.25 58.00 53.70 59.70 73.20 68.77
Price ($/bu.) 5.00 5.00 5.00 5.00 5.00 5.00
Total Crop Revenue 496.25 290.00 268.50 298.50 366.00 343.85

Expenses
Seed 43.20 38.40 32.00 38.71 33.92 37.25
Fertilizers & Nutrients 104.80 80.29 60.79 = 128.31 80.45 90.93
Herbicides 0.00 10.09 13.34 12.51 16.21 10.43
Insecticides 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Fungicides 18.31 1.64 0.00 18.31 12.10 10.07
Custom Applications 31.50 42.70 32.55 48.30 35.00 38.01
Diesel Fuel 14.19 9.81 8.62 6.26 8.12 9.40
Irrigation Energy Costs 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Input Costs 212.60 188.33 147.30 252.40 185.80 197.29
Crop Insurance 7.85 7.85 7.85 7.85 7.85 7.85
Repairs & Maintenance! 14.21 13.29 11.24 8.05 10.63 11.48
Labor, Field Activities 8.49 4.08 3.83 3.25 4.74 4.88
Production Expenses 243.15 213.55 170.22) 271.55 209.02 221.50
Interest 5.09 4.37 3.57 5.70 4.39 4.62
Post-harvest Expenses 26.80 16.24 15.04 16.72 20.49 19.06
Total Operating Expenses 27543 228.75 188.83 293.96 233.90 244.17
Returns to Operating Expenses 220.82 61.25 79.67 4.54 132.10 99.68
Capital Recovery & Fixed Costs 69.92 55.68 46.42 34.36 47.39 50.75
Total Specified Expenses?” 345.35 284.42 235.25 328.32 281.29 294.93
Returns to Specified Expenses 150.90 5.58 33.25 -29.82 84.71 48.92
Operating Expenses/bu. 2.78 3.94 3.52 4.92 3.20 3.67
Total Specified Expenses/bu. 3.48 4.90 4.38 5.50 3.84 442

12