# Document 123948

DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE
Ut RESEARCH & EXTENSION
University of Arkansas System

Sherrie Smith

Arkansas Plant Health Clinic
Newsletter

Follow us on social media

 £| Facebook

Hosta

Hostas are a favorite shade garden plant. They
suffer from only a few diseases as a rule. In
recent years a new virus has been identified in
hosta. The virus is called Hosta Virus X (HVX).
The most common symptom is blue markings or
mottling on a light-colored leaf, usually following
the leaf veins. Leaf tissue may be puckered,
lumpy, and of a different thickness than normally
colored tissue. Dried brown spots and twisted
deformed leaves are another symptom. Some
plants will show no symptoms unless the plant
becomes stressed. This virus is not soil borne
or spread by insects. It is passed by sap from
an infected plant to a healthy one by wounding
with a tool, or by plant propagation by division of
an infected plant. Some people consider the
virus quite attractive and seek out plants with
the blue mottling. Because this virus is at
present poorly understood, some_ experts
recommend removing any plants’ with
symptoms from the garden. Since itis not a soil
borne virus, a new hosta may be planted in the
same location if all tissue from the infected plant
is removed. As with all plant viruses there is no
treatment or cure.

Southern Plant Diagnostic Network

Issue 9-June 26, 2006

Hosta Virus X (HVX)-Potexvirus

Photo by Sherrie Smith, University of
ArkansasCooperative Extension

Tomato

The clinic continues to receive large numbers
of tomato samples with tomato spotted wilt
virus (TSWV). Symptoms on tomato vary
according to cultivar and developmental stage.
Bronzing, black spots, and necrosis of growing
tips are common. Immature fruit have light
green rings with raised centers; ripe fruit will
have distinct orange and red discoloration
patterns. Plants infected with virus are not
curable. They should be pulled up and

The University of Arkansas System Division of Agriculture offers all its Extension and Research programs to all eligible
persons without regard to race, color, sex, gender identity, sexual orientation, national origin, religion, age, disability,
marital or veteran status, genetic information, or any other legally protected status, and is an Affirmative Action/Equal

Opportunity Employer.

=== New Page ===

DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE
Ut RESEARCH & EXTENSION

University of Arkansas System
Sherrie Smith

destroyed. Unfortunately, this virus has a large
host range with 176 plant species found to be
capable of carrying TSWV. Field crops that are
susceptible to TSWV include tobacco, peanut,
tomato, pepper, potato, eggplant, lettuce,
endive, celery, bean, cowpea, _ spinach,
cucumber, and cauliflower. Most flowering
annuals and many herbaceous perennials are
also host to the virus. Common weeds such as
amaranth, chickweed, lamb’s quarters, burdock,
morning glory, shepherd’s purse, yellow clover,
and many others serve as reservoirs for the
disease. It is spread from plant to plant by the
western flower thrip. A bad year for thrips often
means a bad year for TSWV. The disease is
spread only by adult thrips, but larvae pick up
the virus within 15 minutes of feeding on an
infected plant. Control of thrips is difficult as the
eggs and larvae are found inside the flower
buds where they are protected from many
insecticides. Resistance to the virus has been
bred into some cultivars.

Tomato with Tomato Spotted
Wilt Virus (TSWV)-Tospovirus

Photo by Sherrie Smith, University of
ArkansasCooperative Extension

Pa
Southern Plant Diagnostic Network

Issue 9-June 26, 2006

Tomato Spotted Wilt
(TSWV) -Tospovirus

Photo by Sherrie Smith, University of
ArkansasCooperative Extension

Tomato Southern blight caused by Sclerotium
rolfsii is another serious disease of tomato. It
causes a sudden permanent wilt of affected
plants. Plants wilt while still green. The
damage occurs at the soil line when the fungus
girdles the stem. A large irregular brown lesion
occurs there covered with a white mycelial mat.
Small spherical tan to orange fruiting bodies
(scelerotia) may be seen on the lesion. This
disease generally occurs on scattered plants in
the field. The scelerotia are viable in the soil
for several years. Chemical controls are not
effective as a rule. Control consists of crop
rotation, deep plowing, and good sanitation. All
crop residues should be removed from the field
and destroyed.

The University of Arkansas System Division of Agriculture offers all its Extension and Research programs to all eligible
persons without regard to race, color, sex, gender identity, sexual orientation, national origin, religion, age, disability,
marital or veteran status, genetic information, or any other legally protected status, and is an Affirmative Action/Equal

Opportunity Employer.

=== New Page ===

DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE
Ut RESEARCH & EXTENSION
University of Arkansas System

Sherrie Smith

Tomato Southern Blight-

Sclerotium rolfsii

va eg Vs
Photo by Sherrie Smith, University of
ArkansasCooperative Extension

Squash

Squash vine borer Melittia satyriniformi can be
a serious pest of cucurbits. The borers are the
larvae of a clear- wing moth species. They over-
winter as pupae or larvae in the soil, emerging
in late spring as adults. Eggs are deposited
singly on the underside of vines. The larvae
bore into the stem where they tunnel and feed.
Mature larvae exit the stems to pupate and over-
winter in the soil, thus perpetuating the cycle.
Symptoms are wilting, holes in the stem, and
oozing. White larvae (about an inch long) with
brown heads may be seen when the stems are
split open. The larvae may also tunnel into the

Pe,
Southern Plant Diagnostic Network

Issue 9-June 26, 2006

fruit. Insecticides may be applied as soon as
the vines start to run, acetamiprid, bifenthrin,
esfenvalerate, or malathion applied as sprays.
Apply every 7-10 days for 3-5 weeks. Wilted
vines should be inspected for larvae and
destroyed.

Squash Vine Borer- melittia
sat! riniformi

Photo by Sherrie Smith, University of
Arkansas Cooperative Extension

Cucumber

Anthracnose on cucumbers is caused by
Colletotrichum obiculare. It starts out as
yellowish water-soaked spots that turn brown
to black. The spots enlarge and dry out. The
centers fall out of the lesions giving a shot hole
effect. Infected fruit have sunken circular
black spots of different sizes. Crop rotation
and destruction of old vines go a long way
toward controlling this problem.
Chlorothalonil, every 7-10 days controls
anthracnose in home gardens.

The University of Arkansas System Division of Agriculture offers all its Extension and Research programs to all eligible
persons without regard to race, color, sex, gender identity, sexual orientation, national origin, religion, age, disability,
marital or veteran status, genetic information, or any other legally protected status, and is an Affirmative Action/Equal

Opportunity Employer.

=== New Page ===

DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE
RESEARCH & EXTENSION
University of Arkansas System

Sherrie Smith

Cucumber Anthracnose-
Colletotrichum obiculare

Photo by Sherrie Smith, University of
Arkansas Cooperative Extension

Turf

Warm season grasses are susceptible to
various diseases caused by Bipolaris and
Exerobilum spp, including leaf spot, crown rot,
and root rot. Small purple to black spots may
appear on the leaves, stems, or crowns of
bermudagrass. The centers of the spots turn
brown and fade to tan with a purple border.
Severely infected leaves die and appear straw
colored. The overall pattern appears as brown
fading out of different sized patches. The
severity of the disease increases. with
temperature and humidity. A 78°F period of 8-
10 hours with 100% humidity is all that is
required for severe infection. Severity is
greater when fertility is compromised by

“L
Southern Plant Diagnostic Network

Issue 9-June 26, 2006

improper fertilization. Adequate nitrogen and
potassium levels must be maintained. Avoid
excess nitrogen. Do not allow turf to become
extremely dry but avoid evening irrigation.
Irrigate only in the morning to allow turf to dry
out. Good surface and root zone drainage is
important. Fungicide applications may be
needed every 7-10 to control severe
outbreaks. See MP 154.

Turf Bipolaris-Bipolaris spp.
|

Photo by Zach Gardner, University of
Arkansas Cooperative Extension

The University of Arkansas System Division of Agriculture offers all its Extension and Research programs to all eligible
persons without regard to race, color, sex, gender identity, sexual orientation, national origin, religion, age, disability,
marital or veteran status, genetic information, or any other legally protected status, and is an Affirmative Action/Equal

Opportunity Employer.

=== New Page ===

DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE
Ut RESEARCH & EXTENSION
University of Arkansas System
Sherrie Smith

White Tip Nematode - Is It A Problem
In Arkansas? By Ronnie Bateman

The rice white tip nematode (Aphelenchoides
besseyi) is a seed-borne nematode that is
widespread in the rice-growing region of the
Mid-South. The name whitetip comes from the
characteristic symptoms this nematode causes
on infected rice plants that include whitening of
the leaf tip, giving the appearance of having
been rolled between one’s thumb and forefinger
to squeeze out the water and then allowed to dry
(Figure 1). White tip was severe in Arkansas
during the 1950s and 1960s but was eventually
controlled through cleaning up the rice seed
supply and the development of newer rice
cultivars with resistance, so this disease rarely
causes damage in the state today.

In some rice-producing countries, particularly in
climates with mild winters, white-tip is still
common. The nematode can, in some
situations, survive on weeds or on debris from
the preceding rice crop, although survival in and
transmission by infested seed is by far the most
common means of spread. This nematode
feeds on the youngest tissue of emerging plants
and will move upward as the plant grows. It will
eventually migrate to the developing panicle
where it penetrates the florets and then feeds on
the ovaries, stamens, and embryos. The
reproduction rate is high in the florets before
anthesis. Reproduction declines after anthesis
and then ceases in maturing grain when the
nematode enters a long-term resting phase
known as anhydrobiosis as the seed dries.

Yield losses in infested fields vary with
the cultivar, temperature, year, and other

y

Southern Plant Diagnostic Network

Issue 9-June 26, 2006

variable factors. The average loss in heavily
infested fields ranged from 10 to 30% in the
past although losses up to 70% were reported.
In addition to the characteristic white leaf tip
symptom, other symptoms include necrosis
and shredding of the leaves (Figure 2), twisted
flag leaves, shortened panicles, lower grain
yield, misshapen grains, sterile flowers, stunted
plants, and late ripening and maturation.

For Arkansas rice producers, white tip is a
much greater concern from a marketing
standpoint than for potential yield loss these
days. Certain important export markets for
Arkansas rice currently have a quarantine
against this nematode. Any rough rice grain
that is being shipped from Arkansas to any of
these markets has to be accompanied by an
official phytosanitary certification that the lot
has been sampled by an official agency
(usually either the State Plant Board or the
Federal Grain Inspection Service) and tested
for the presence of the nematode by an
approved Nematology laboratory. In Arkansas,
the Nematology laboratory is the Arkansas
Nematode Diagnostic Clinic located at Hope,
AR (870-777-9702, ext. 119 or ext. 128).

Is this nematode still a concern for
Arkansas rice producers? Unfortunately, the
answer is yes. If nematodes are detected in a
grain sample, that grain cannot be shipped to
any markets that have quarantine on the white-
tip nematode. If there is the possibility of
detecting Aphelenchoides besseyi in Arkansas
rice, there is a marketing concern for Arkansas
rice growers. Fortunately, while a degree of
concern still exists, the risk appears to be rather
low according to a recent survey. This survey

The University of Arkansas System Division of Agriculture offers all its Extension and Research programs to all eligible
persons without regard to race, color, sex, gender identity, sexual orientation, national origin, religion, age, disability,
marital or veteran status, genetic information, or any other legally protected status, and is an Affirmative Action/Equal

Opportunity Employer.

=== New Page ===

DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE
Ut RESEARCH & EXTENSION

University of Arkansas System
Sherrie Smith

was sponsored by the Animal and Plant Health
Inspection Service (APHIS), and conducted in
2005 jointly by Dr. Rick Cartwright, Dr. Chuck
Wilson, and the Arkansas Nematode Diagnostic

Clinic. Only a single sample of 809 grain
samples collected from commercial production
fields statewide contained A. besseyi. It
is important that producers and _ others in the
rice industry continue to be alert for white-tip
nematode in the state. Prevention is the most
effective and most easily accomplished
management strategy for this nematode pest.

Rice White-Tip Nematode
damage- Aphelenchoides besseyi

Photo by Ronnie Bateman, University of
Arkansas Cooperative Extension

This bulletin from the Cooperative Extension
Plant Health Clinic (Plant Disease Clinic) is an

Pe,
Southern Plant Diagnostic Network

Issue 9-June 26, 2006

electronic update about diseases and other
problems observed in our lab each month.
Input from everybody interested in plants is
welcome and appreciated.

"This work is supported by the Crop Protection
and Pest Management Program [grant no.
2017-70006-27279/project accession no.
1013890] from the USDA National Institute of
Food and Agriculture."

The University of Arkansas System Division of Agriculture offers all its Extension and Research programs to all eligible
persons without regard to race, color, sex, gender identity, sexual orientation, national origin, religion, age, disability,
marital or veteran status, genetic information, or any other legally protected status, and is an Affirmative Action/Equal

Opportunity Employer.