# Document 124006

LA

DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE
RESEARCH & EXTENSION

University of Arkansas System

Cooperative Extension Service

User’s Guide for Interactive Whole Farm Budgets in Excel

For accessible versions of this PDF file please contact Breana Watkins at 870-933-4565 or
bjwatkins@uaex.edu. For questions and comments related to the University of Arkansas Crop
Enterprise Budget Program contact Breana Watkins at 870-933-4565 or bjwatkins@uaex.edu.

Crop Production

The Whole Farm Budgets program is available for combined production of cotton, corn,
soybeans, long-grain rice, medium-grain rice, sorghum, wheat and peanuts as a single farm unit.
Worksheets in the interactive Excel file for users to select acreage, expected yield and price, and
share of revenue are labeled Cotton, Corn, Soybean, Rice_LG, Rice_MG, Wheat, Sorghum, and
Peanut. Table | shows the entries available for each crop. Default input costs in the program
represent alternative irrigation methods. Two data categories are available to represent
production, 1) owned land and 2) rented land. Cash land rent paid is entered in the white cells of
line 26 for each crop as indicated in Table 2. Grower share of revenue should be set to 100% for
cash rent situations. For cotton in Table 3, a rebate per bale of production may be entered in the
highlighted line below Grower Share Revenue, %. If no rebate value is entered for cotton, the
value is set equal to post-harvest expenses.

Table 1. Example of Data Entries for Whole Farm Budgets

Soybean Owned Land Rented Land (Share or Cash)
Irrigation Type

Irrigation Power
Acres
Yield
Farm Price 9.50 9.50) 9.50 9.50) 9.50
Grower Share Revenue, % 100%! 100%) 100%! 100%) 100%!

Table 2. Entry for Cash Land Rent

=== New Page ===

Cash Land Rent o.oo] 0.00] 0.00] 0.00[__0.00]
Table 3. Example of Data Entries for Cotton

Cotton Owned Land Rented Land (Share or Cash)
Irrigation Type
Irrigation Power
Acres
Yield
Farm Price

Grower Share, Lint Revenue, %

0.68}

‘If no value entered in X_Cotton, values are set equal to post-harvest expenses and board fees.
Default percentages for grower share of expenses are 100% as indicated in Table 4. Alternative

percentages less than 100% entered for Grower Expenses Percent in Table 4 will decrease the
grower production cost of a production item.

Table 4. Grower Share of Expenses

Soybean Rented Land (Share or Cash) Grower Expense Percent, Share Rented Land]

Irrigation Type
Irrigation Power

900 0

‘Yield
Farm Price
Grower Share Revenue, %

Seed

Fertilizers & Nutrients
Chemicals

‘Custom Applications
Other Inputs

Diesel Fuel, Field Activities
Irrigation Energy

Fees

Crop Insurance

Repairs & Maintenance
Labor, Field Activities
Interest

Custom Harvest
Post-harvest Expenses
Check-offs, Board Fees
‘Cash Land Rent

Farm Costs and Returns Summary

Financial results presented in Table 5 for combined crop production are calculated in the Farm
worksheet. The program calculates estimates for Capital Recovery and Ownership Costs of

=== New Page ===

equipment. Users may substitute the calculated default value with an alternative value entered
into the white cell for this expense. Similarly, users may enter alternative real estate taxes paid
for owned land in the corresponding while cell. Users enter values for Price Loss Coverage
(PLC), Agricultural Risk Coverage (ARC), and loan deficiency payments (LDP) in the
corresponding white cells. The interactive program for PLC, ARC, and LDP in Excel is available
at http://www.uaex.edu/crop-budgets to estimate these expected payments. Users may enter
alternative values attributed to farm management and unpaid labor in the white cell for
Management, Unpaid Labor.

Table 6 presents default values for the interest rate of operating loans and the average portion of
the calendar year allowed for repaying borrowed operating capital. The default value of 0.50 for
Portion of the Year Financed represents 6 months. For 9 months, the white cell would be revised
to 0.75.

Table 5. Farm Costs and Returns Summary

Farm Costs and Returns Summary

Crop Cotton Corn Soybean Rice,LG Rice, MG Wheat Sorghum Peanut Total
Total Revenue 0 514,500 798.000 598.500 0 0 0 0 1,911,000
Grower Revenue! 0 385,875 598.500 448.875 0 0 0 0 1,433,250
Input Costs 0 269.475 369.147 329.877 0 0 0 0 968.498
Production Expenses 0 306.296 426.337 367,777 0 0 0 0 1,100,411
Operating Expenses 0 378,879 461.960 451,542 0 0 0 0 1,292,381
Crop, Returns to 0 6996 136,540 -2,667 0 0 0 0
Operating Expenses , . -2, 140,869
Farm, Returns to
Operating Expenses Mate,

Capital Recovery & . 0
5 .
0 hip C 247,028] 247,028 Estimate: Includes Personal Property Taxes and Equipment Insurance

Real Estate Taxes 0 0 Estimate 0 Owned Acres Millage Rate[_ 46.00 |
Other Expenses 0

Net Farm Income 106.159
from Operations —
PLC, ARC Payments 96,089
LDP 0
Management,
5 850) http://data bls. gov! cs f - Ms,
faimeriicths 63,850 data.bls.gow/oe SOC code 119013: Average for AR, LA, MS, & Ff
Net Returns -73,920 DIVISION OF AGRIC ULTURE

RESEARCH & EXTENSION

'Cash rent is deducted from Total Revenue to calculate Grower Revenue. versity of Arkansas System

=== New Page ===

Table 6. Operating Interest Rate and Portion of Year Financed

The Whole Farm Budgets program estimates repairs and maintenance for equipment by applying
engineering formulas, and values should be regarded as expenses for full service repairs. Farm
labor expenses are estimated by applying hourly wage rates to estimated time periods of field
work for production activities. In practice, hired farm labor is typically utilized for some repairs
and maintenance of equipment. Table 7 indicates a situation in which 50% of total equipment
repairs are performed by hired farm labor. Of the repairs performed by farm labor, 50% of the
total value consists of parts and supplies and 50% of the total value is for hired farm labor. These
percentages in the white cells may be revised to represent unique situations. Percentage
selections in Table 7 do not affect Net Returns in Table 5 and are only for information to
estimate expenses allocated for hired labor expenses.

Table 7. Detail for Farm Labor and Equipment Repairs

Revising Crop Production Expenses

Expenses on a per acre basis are contained in worksheets labeled X_Cotton, X_Corn,
X_Soybean, X_Rice_LG, X_Rice_MG, X_Wheat, X_Sorghum, and X_Peanut. Expenses are
derived from the crop enterprise budgets available at http://www.uaex.edu/crop-budgets. Users
may apply alternative expenses in the Whole Farm Budgets by revising production methods in
any individual crop enterprise budget. After revising a crop enterprise budget, go to the
worksheet labeled Links. Copy cells C3 through C27. Perform Paste Special and select Values
into rows 6 through 26 of the corresponding expense worksheet in the Whole Farm Budgets file.

=== New Page ===

LA

DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE
RESEARCH & EXTENSION

University of Arkansas System

University of Arkansas, United States Department of Agriculture and County Governments Cooperating.

The Arkansas Cooperative Extension Service offers its programs to all eligible persons regardless of race,
color, national origin, religion, gender, age, disability, marital or veteran status, or any other legally
protected status, and is an Affirmative Action/Equal Opportunity Employer.