# Document 124043

DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE
Ut RESEARCH & EXTENSION
University of Arkansas System

| wish to become a Master Gardener in . _ County. | want to be accepted into the
40-hour Master Gardener training program offered by the University of Arkansas Cooperative Extension Service. |
Understand that in exchange for the training, | will volunteer at least 40 hours of my time to the Master Gardener program
within the next year. | understand that | will become a certified Master Gardener when | complete the training and an
examination.

Master Gardener Application

Signature . Date |

Name

Address

Day Phone Night Phone |

Please complete the following
Years of gardening experience

Type of gardening experience

List areas of specialty or hobbies (e.g. flowers, herbs, ornamentals, etc.)

List experiences working with the community, schools, churches, youth, senior citizens, etc.

Please list group affiliations (e.g. garden clubs, plant societies, etc.)

How did you learn about the Master Gardener Program?

Why do you want to become a Master Gardener?

The Master Gardener training willbe heldon AS Registration fee will cover
all supplies. You must complete all five classes to be certified as a Master Gardener.

Comments

The Arkansas Cooperative Extension Service offers its programs to all eligible persons regardless of race, color, national origin,
religion, gender, age, disability, marital or veteran status, or any other legally protected status, and is an Equal Opportunity Employer.