# Document 124096

Row Crops

White County Newsletter
February 2023

2023 Production Meeting

It’s that time of year for all the winter meetings, and this year’s White County
production meeting will be on February 10 starting at 8:30 a.m. at the extension
office. This will be a good way to get a jump start on the upcoming growing
season. We will have several of our U of A specialists come and give
presentations on the latest information and updates for crop production (listed
below) and a lunch will be provided. If there is any particular subject you would
like to hear about please contact me so | can let the speaker know it is a topic
you would like discussed.

County Update- Jerrod Haynes, White County Agri CEA

Rice- Jarrod Hardke, Rice Extension Agronomist

Soybeans- Chris Elkins, Soybean/Wheat Verification Coordinator
Corn- Jason Kelley, Corn Extension Agronomist

Plant Pathology- Terry Spurlock, Extension Plant Pathologist
Weed Science- Tom Barber, Extension Weed Scientist

Ag Economics- Hunter Biram, Extension Agriculture Economist

How will the midterms affect ag laws and policy?

What impact will the 2022 midterm elections have on agricultural law and
policy? Hunt Shipman, principal and director at Cornerstone Government
Affairs, will discuss the implications during a webinar January 25. “Now that the
elections are behind us, the stage is set for what will be a complicated year for
agriculture, especially given the current composition of Congress and pending
expiration of the 2018 Farm Bill,” Shipman said. “The tight margins between the
parties in both chambers of Congress adds an extra wrinkle in 2023 to the
budgeting, appropriations, and Farm Bill processes.”

There are many issues at play for agriculture, both in Congress and at the U.S.
Department of Agriculture, the Environmental Protection Agency, and other
federal agencies. Most provisions of the 2018 Farm Bill are set to expire in 2023,
something Congress will be debating in the months ahead.

“The stakes are always high for agriculture, especially in a Farm Bill year, and
2023 is no exception. Hunt has excellent insight relative to the overall legislative
and regulatory process,” NALC Director Harrison Pitman said. “Hunt will tell us
the state of play for the Farm Bill and other ag-related legislative and regulatory
activity.”

-Drew Viguet National Agricultural Law Center U of A System Division of Agriculture

ea

White
County

Topics

e 2023 White County
Production Meeting

e Midterms & Ag Policy

e Private Pesticide Applicator
Training

e 2023 Soybean Outlook

e Rice ad hoc Payments

e = Sprayer/PAT Clinic

UA

DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE
RESEARCH & EXTENSION

University of Arkansas System

U of A Cooperative
Extension Service

2400 Old Searcy Landing
Rd. Searcy, AR. 72143

(501) 268-5394

www.uaex.uada.edu/counti
es/white

=== New Page ===

PRIVATE PESTICIDE APPLICATOR TRAINING

Anyone wishing to purchase or apply “restricted use” pesticides in
the coming year must be licensed by the Arkansas State Plant
Board. Before being eligible for a license, a certain amount of
training is required. The Cooperative Extension Service in White
County will be conducting a training class for the Private Pesticide
applicator license. A fee of $20 per person will be charged at the
door for those participating in the private pesticide applicator
training. Training will be located at the White County Extension
Office at 2400 Old Searcy Landing Road in Searcy.

Classes are scheduled as follows:
February 20, 2023 6:00 p.m. White County Extension Office Searcy
March 16, 2023 6:00 p.m. White County Extension Office Searcy

The Arkansas Cooperative Extension Service is an equal
opportunity/equal access/affirmative action institution. If you require a
reasonable accommodation to participate or need materials in another
format, please contact White County Extension office at 501-268-5394 (or
other appropriate office) as soon as possible. Dial 711 for Arkansas Relay

If you can’t attend the February or March training you have the
option of re-certifying or certifying online. To take the online
training go to the following link https://bit.ly/3j9s9aj . If you have
any questions call the White County Extension Office.

Coursoycheckor

Progress Powered by U.S. Farmers

SOYBEAN

PROMOTION BOARD

AY ARKANSAS

Feral Hogs

Need help controlling
nuisance hogs?

Just a reminder that feral hogs can
be trapped and disposed of anytime
of the year in Arkansas. White
County landowners and producers
have access to a Game Changer Jr.
hog trap for $25/week. If you are
having an issue, please reach out for
help. Call 268-5394 to schedule the
trap now or for more info on
managing feral hogs.

=== New Page ===

After a difficult year, Mid-south soybean states keep hope alive for 2023

After any three consecutive years of soybean farming in the Mid-South, it’s going
to take more than one Biblical plague to make an impression on the pros. Speaking
to more than 100 growers, consultants and other agriculture industry professionals
in early January, Jeremy Ross, extension soybean agronomist for the University of
Arkansas System Division of Agriculture, was duly undaunted. “Two years ago, we
had the flood, and last year we had the drought, so I’m trying to imagine which of
the remaining plagues we’re going to have for 2023,” Ross said. “We’ve already had
locusts and flies.”

Hunter Biram, extension economist for the Division of Agriculture said that if there
was a single phrase to sum up the forecast for the 2023 soybean market, it might
be “keep an eye on Brazil.” While drought has affected key soybean-growing
regions in the South American country, Brazilian growers are still on track for a
record year, he said. “As long as there is a little bit of rain Brazil will have that record
yield everyone is talking about. A little bit of rain is going to go a long way for them.”
Brazil is the world’s leading soybean exporter, with 53 percent of the market. The
United States is second, with a 35 percent share.

Trent Roberts, extension soil fertility specialist for the Division of Agriculture, said
that much of what soybean growers in Arkansas and its neighboring states battled
in 2022 is known as “hidden hunger,” a term Robert uses to describe potassium
deficiency in the plant, limiting production potential — and, by extension,
profitability. “When we get into the arena of fertilization practices and nutrient
management, the elephant in the room is the historically high fertilizer price,”
Roberts said. “Over the past 18-24 months, we’ve seen the highest potash fertilizer
prices in history — and potash is typically the highest input cost for soybean
production.” But because reducing the potash input is among the worst options
available to growers, Roberts said he and his fellow extension experts are hoping
to give growers the best chance they can get to play whatever hand they’re dealt

year to year. “With potash being our largest input cost, we’re trying to give
producers as much info as we can to effectively manage that input.” That includes
a potash rate calculator, designed to give growers a profit-maximizing K fertilization
rate, and new tissue sampling techniques meant to be employed mid-season. “It

=== New Page ===

allows farmers to identify whether or not their fertilization program is adequate,
or would benefit from additional fertilizer,” he said.

Mike Hamilton, extension irrigation educator for the Division of Agriculture, said
that much of what makes up the “best management practices” in irrigation comes
down to scheduling — but in a drought year, it’s hard to play by that book.” In’22,
scheduling wasn’t much of an issue, because we could only get to it when we could
feasibly get to it,” Hamilton said. “We were so tapped, trying to get caught up —
we were behind. We didn’t turn irrigation equipment off unless we needed to do
maintenance.” “We’re to the point now where our farmers are top-notch,”
Hamilton said. “But we need to get that 1 percent improvement when we can. We
want to introduce these water management practices and devices that can help
them save a dollar, save a round of irrigation, prevent tubing ruptures, and so on.

-Ryan McGeeney U of A System Division of Agriculture

Fact sheet provides answers about ad hoc payments to rice farmers

Rice farmers with questions about funding contained in the omnibus bill signed last
month by President Biden can find answers in a fact sheet released Friday by the
University of Arkansas System Division of Agriculture. The Fiscal Year Omnibus
Appropriations Bill includes $250 million in funding for a one-time payment to rice
producers to help them offset high costs faced by the industry. Drivers of those
costs include weather, war and other factors, said Hunter Biram, extension
economist for the Division of Agriculture. “We knew there would be a lot of
questions and we wanted to have ready information for Arkansas rice farmers to
make sound decisions for the 2023 growing season,” Biram said.

The fact sheet is available for download at:

https://www.uaex.uada.edu/publications/pdf/FSA68.pdf.

=== New Page ===

Biram authored FSA68 along with Jarrod Hardke, extension rice agronomist for the
Division of Agriculture and Harrison Pittman, director of the National Agricultural
Law Center.

“Rice producers in particular were impacted heavily by major increases in
production costs in 2022, more so than other crops,” Hardke said. “Hopefully these
payments ensure that rice farms are able to stay in operation moving forward and
the economic outlook improves.”

Harrison Pittman, director of the National Agricultural Law Center said the ad hoc
funding “was a huge legislative lift and a significant help to rice producers in
Arkansas and beyond.”

Both Biram and Hardke urged rice growers to exercise caution where the payments
are concerned.

“While this assistance will be key to growers remaining profitable, caution should
also be exercised regarding expectations about how much each grower will receive
and how that impacts their planning and operation for the 2023 season,” Hardke
said.

Farmers should be sure to read the FAQs in the fact sheet and urged them to “not
make any decisions until you get a check in the mail,” Biram said.

- Mary Hightower U of A System Division of Agriculture

DF Ws eves, Al\ Be; = Je Kir aL ae oI ) es ; 7 6
wal ais uns aay RAS UGS

=== New Page ===

Sprayer Clean Out and Technology Clinic

The White County Extension Service will be hosting a teaching session on
the proper way to clean your sprayers and sprayer equipment, as well as
other important topics related to spraying technologies and safety. This
will be a great session for anyone who owns and regularly sprays
pesticides in their operation. It would also be very beneficial for your farm
employees to attend so they will also know the proper techniques of
cleaning pesticides out of spray rigs and equipment and safety protocols.

Application Technology Specialist, Dr. Jason Davis, will go over some
equipment catch points, triple rinsing, cleaning solutions, and other ways
to help you make sure you have a clean rig for the next job.

The meeting will be free to all that would like to attend, and a lunch
provided.

With all the material covered before lunch, there will be one more session
for anyone or their employees that would like to get a certified PAT
license for a $20 fee after lunch.

The meeting will begin at 10:00 a.m. at:
The Bald Knob Airport

234 Airport Rd

Bald Knob, AR 72010

This will be a great opportunity to learn how to avoid mistakes that can
happen from not properly cleaning equipment.

If there are any questions, please contact me.

AR Row Crops
Blog

Want to Know What is Up
in AR Row Crops?

Arkansas Row Crops now
has a blog that you can
check for weekly market

updates and_research-
based crop
recommendations and
updates from our

specialists.

AR Row Crop Blog

Farmland
Wanted

Need Someone to

Partner with on the Farm?
We have a request from a
local man looking to start
row crop farming. If you
are interested or have
questions, please contact
Bobby Morrison at:

(870) 552-5109.

Flow Meters

Meters Available

If you need to get your
wells checked before the
season gets too busy, just
let me know. We have an
8” and 10” flow meter you
can check out from our

office.

=== New Page ===

2023 White County Demonstrations
It is that time of year again!! Time to get some research
demonstrations planned on your farm. Do you have any issues or
challenges you would like to have some help with? Have any
burning questions or ideas that you would like to see answered on
your own farm? If so, let me know!

Current:

Wheat Verification- Shannon & Luke Feather
Upcoming:

Soybean Verification- Patrick Hambrick

Rice Verification — John Hamilton

Enlist Soybean Variety- Patrick Hambrick
Extend Flex Soybean Variety- Brandon Cain
Deer Repellent- Brad & RJ Peacock

Corn Verification- Brad & RJ Peacock

Corn Hybrid Demo- Keith & Jacob Feather
Green Seeker Demonstration- Jacob Feather
Cover Crop Moisture- Brad Peacock

Corn Ear Worm Traps- County Wide
Southwestern Corn Borer Traps- County Wide

Please, feel free to contact me for further information about the
items in this newsletter or anything else | may be able to assist
you with.

Sincerely,

ll 2 Figas

Jerrod Haynes

County Extension Agent - Agriculture

(501) 230-9974

The University of Arkansas System Division of Agriculture offers all its Extension and
Research programs and services without regard to race, color, sex, gender identity,
sexual orientation, national origin, religion, age, disability, marital or veteran status,

genetic information, or any other legally protected status, and is an Affirmative
Action/Equal Opportunity Employer.

Helpful Publications:

UPDATED Row Crop Plant-

Back Intervals for Common

Herbicides

Max Use Rates per
Application & Per Season

for Common Herbicides

Application Cut-Off
Timings for Common

Herbicides

=== New Page ===

DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE
Ut RESEARCH & EXTENSION
University of Arkansas System
COOPERATIVE EXTENSION SERVICE
2301 SOUTH UNIVERSITY AVENUE

LITTLE ROCK, ARKANSAS 72204
OFFICIAL BUSINESS