# Document 124093

Row Crops

White County Newsletter
January 2023

2023 Production Meeting

It’s that time of year for all the winter meetings, and this year’s White County
production meeting will be on February 10 starting at 8:30 a.m. at the extension
office. This will be a good way to get a jump start on the upcoming growing season.
We will have several of our U of A specialists come and give presentations on the
latest information and updates for crop production (listed below) and a lunch will
be provided. If there is any particular subject you would like to hear about please
contact me so | can let the speaker know it is a topic you would like discussed.

Rice- Jarrod Hardke, Rice Extension Agronomist

Soybeans- Chris Elkins, Soybean/Wheat Verification Coordinator
Corn- Jason Kelley, Corn Extension Agronomist

Plant Pathology- Terry Spurlock, Extension Plant Pathologist
Weed Science- Tom Barber, Extension Weed Scientist

Ag Economics- Hunter Biram, Extension Agriculture Economist

What is your vision for precision agriculture in Arkansas?

How can precision agriculture help you? We want to find out. Our team is gathering
information regarding precision agriculture adoption and use in Arkansas. Responses to
this survey will help us define the stakeholder vision for precision agriculture.

Why do we need this data? To identify research and educational priorities regarding
precision agriculture and soil testing in Arkansas.

Who can participate? Field crop farmers, crop consultants, and county agents in
Arkansas

Why should you participate?

This survey will take about 10 minutes of your time and our findings will help us better
serve you!

Scan the QR Code below to access our survey.

ea

White
County

Topics

e 2023 White County
Production Meeting

e Precision Ag Survey

e Private Pesticide
Applicator Training

e Corn 2022 Review

e =Rice 2022 Review

e 2022 Rice Research

e Looking ahead to
2023

UA

DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE
RESEARCH & EXTENSION

University of Arkansas System

U of A Cooperative
Extension Service
2400 Old Searcy
Landing Rd.

Searcy, AR. 72143
(501) 268-5394
www.uaex.uada.edu/co
unties/white

=== New Page ===

PRIVATE PESTICIDE APPLICATOR TRAINING

Anyone wishing to purchase or apply “restricted use” pesticides in
the coming year must be licensed by the Arkansas State Plant Board.
Before being eligible for a license, a certain amount of training is
required. The Cooperative Extension Service in White County will be
conducting a training class for the Private Pesticide applicator
license. A fee of $20 per person will be charged at the door for those
participating in the private pesticide applicator training. Training will
be located at the White County Extension Office at 2400 Old Searcy
Landing Road in Searcy.

Classes are scheduled as follows:
February 20, 2023 6:00 p.m. White County Extension Office Searcy
March 16, 2023 6:00 p.m. White County Extension Office Searcy

The Arkansas Cooperative Extension Service is an equal
opportunity/equal access/affirmative action institution. If you
require a reasonable accommodation to participate or need
materials in another format, please contact White County
Extension office at 501-268-5394 (or other appropriate office) as
soon as possible. Dial 711 for Arkansas Relay.

If you can’t attend the February or March training you have the
option of re-certifying or certifying online. To take the online
training go to the following link: https://bit.ly/3j9s9aj . If you have
any questions call the White County Extension Office.

Coursoycheckor

Progress Powered by U.S. Farmers

VW, Barkansas

NSOYBEAN

Feral Hogs

Need help controlling
nuisance hogs?

Just a reminder that feral hogs
can be trapped and disposed of
anytime of the year in Arkansas.
White County landowners and
producers have access to a
Game Changer Jr. hog trap for
$25/week. If you are having an
issue, please reach out for help.
Call 268-5394 to schedule the
trap now or for more info. on
managing feral hogs.

=== New Page ===

Arkansas pushes corn through drought

Jason Kelley, University of Arkansas System Division of Agriculture professor and wheat and
feed grains extension agronomist, said the drought and high temperatures hit at a crucial
point for corn growers.

“For corn, the pollination period is very critical for the plant to have water, and that lined up
right when we were trying to get started on irrigation,” Kelley said. “It was a tough year.
Irrigation is effective, but it is never effective as a good, widespread rain.”

Kelley noted that the weather from Memorial Day to July 4th significantly impacts corn yields,
and that time was very hot and dry this year. Even though about 95 percent of the state’s
corn acres can be irrigated, the drought and heat still took a toll on yields, he said. Farmers
struggled to get corn irrigated timely because, in many instances, they were also trying to
flood rice and irrigate soybean. Arkansas farmers harvested 690,000 of the 710,000 acres of
corn planted in 2022, according to estimates from the United States Department of
Agriculture’s National Agricultural Statistics Service. The number of acres planted was down
16.5 percent from last year. The state average yield was 176 bushels per acre, down 4.3
percent from the prior year’s 183 bushels per acre.

For the past 10 years, Arkansas has averaged 181 bushels per acre. Kelley said that the
state’s average yields have increased by 100 bushels per acre in the past 40 years through
a combination of better farming practices, more irrigation, improved hybrids and more
nutrients.

“On average, we’re gaining about 2.5 bushels per acre a year,” Kelley said. “We’re much
better growers now than we were 20, 30, 40 years ago. At the same time, if you took those
hybrids we had 40 years ago and planted them this year, the yields would be considerably
less than the hybrids we are growing now.”

Kelley said the drought and high temperatures were the two main culprits of the state’s corn
yield decrease.

Many farmers also rotate corn with soybeans, which helps improve yields and decrease plant
diseases. Kelley said the Arkansas Agricultural Experiment Station’s Lon Man Cotton
Research Station in Marianna is wrapping up a 10-year study that shows soybean yields
improved by seven to eight bushels per acre in a corn-soybean rotation compared to
continuous soybean.

Although fuel costs were higher in 2022, fertilizer prices saw an even steeper increase,
impacting profit margins. Kelley said fertilizer generally accounts for 30 percent or more of
the costs to grow corn because of its high nutrient demand.

“Fertilizer prices hit the corn farmer more than anybody just because of the amount of fertilizer
we typically apply,” Kelley said. “The grain price is a pretty good number at around $7 a
bushel. Yields were a little down, but if you look at the price, they still should come out OK.”

Kelley said that it was a good harvest for Arkansas corn even though the farmers had to work
harder to get their yields because of the drought and higher fuel and fertilizer prices.

- John Lovett University of Arkansas System Division of Agriculture

=== New Page ===

High input costs, weather extremes challenged rice growers in 2022

“The year began with dramatically higher input costs, especially for fertilizer and diesel fuel,”
said Hardke, extension rice agronomist. Rice prices began to rise around planting time,
holding out hope that farmers might recoup their input costs in the end. But 2022 was the
fourth or fifth wet spring in a row, and that delayed field preparation and planting, making
those projected prices shaky.

“The rains stabilized a bit around May,” he said. “And then in June, it was like someone threw
a switch, the rain stopped, and temperatures got up in the 90s. It got hot and dry, and
everything just dried up really fast.”

The dry weather in June, when it was time to fertilize and flood rice, put a lot of strain on
irrigation systems.

“Rice is very hardy in the face of extremes,” Hardke said. “So, in June, the rice was growing
so fast it was soaking up all the water. A lot of growers were late getting nitrogen incorporated
into the soil, and it took much longer to put a flood on the rice. Fields that might take three to
four days to flood were taking 10 or 14 days.”

Irrigation pumps were running non-stop. “Growers experienced a lot of problems with wells
going down because they were running so hard. And then, they had issues with replacing
parts because of supply chain shortages.”

Average yields are down from last year’s record average, according to the U.S. Department
of Agriculture’s National Agricultural Statistics Service estimate, Hardke said. “Average yield
is estimated at 165 bushels per acre, down from almost 170 bushels an acre in 2021.”

While the average yield is lower this year, Hardke said — and he expects it to be a little lower
when the final data is in — it’s not far off the previous years of 2017-2020.

Dry weather kept disease pressure low. But late rains in some areas in August revived
disease problems in those fields until hot, dry weather returned. On the other hand, the dry
weather during harvest was a bonus.

“This year was the smoothest, driest harvest anyone could remember,” Hardke said.

The extended dry weather also allowed many growers to prepare fields for next year, work
that usually has to wait for a dry window between August and April. And those windows of
opportunity have been few in recent years.

“The speed that farmers were able to move through their fields meant that a ton of fall field
work got done, especially in northeast Arkansas,” Hardke said. “A lot of fields are basically
ready to plant next year.”

- Fred Miller U of A System Division of Agriculture

=== New Page ===

2022 Rice Research Highlights

The Arkansas Agricultural Experiment Station, the Division of Agriculture’s research arm, released four new rice
varieties in 2022.

CLL18 is a high-yielding Clearfield variety that will be available to growers in 2023 through Horizon Ag. It
averaged 221 bushels per acre over two years in the 2020-21 Arkansas Rice Variety Advancement Trials
conducted by the University of Arkansas System Division of Agriculture.

“This was the highest yielding nonhybrid Clearfield® rice in the ARVAT for those two years,” said Karen
Moldenhauer, professor emeritus and rice breeder for the experiment station. “It has looked very good in all of
the tests it has been in.

“CLL18 is an excellent long-grain Clearfield® line derived from the cross of Roy J and CL142-AR, made at the
Rice Research and Extension Center at Stuttgart in 2011,” Moldenhauer said.

Two new conventional rice varieties, Taurus and Ozark, also debuted in 2022.

Taurus, a new medium-grain rice, could even be a gamechanger in the coming years for medium-grain rice
growers in the South, according to Hardke.

Taurus offered an average yield potential of 232 bushels per acre in the 2021 Arkansas Rice Variety
Advancement Trials.

“Based on ARVAT data, Taurus has a significant yield advantage over all current medium-grain varieties in all
test locations,” said Xueyan Sha, senior rice breeder for the experiment station.

Sha said Taurus was bred for Midsouth conditions and would be adaptable to wherever Jupiter or Titan are
grown. Taurus is a cross between four other conventional varieties and has a more plump kernel than Jupiter.
It outshined even the latest medium-grain varieties, Lynx and Titan, in the 2021 trials at six locations. Taurus
brought in the highest average yield in a Clay County field with 249 bushels per acre.

Ozark, a new conventional long-grain variety, is a cross of Diamond and LaKast.

“Diamond has shown some issues the last two years,” Sha said. “It seems it has not been as consistent on yield
potential, so this one we hope can be used as a replacement for Diamond. It’s definitely shown a yield advantage
in the ARVAT.”

Ozark offered an average of 218 bushels per acre in the 2021 ARVAT conducted at six locations in Arkansas.
Sha said the overall yield advantage of Ozark over Diamond is about 5 percent.

Ozark is agronomically similar to Diamond, with a plant height of 43 inches. Maturity for Ozark is a day or two
earlier than Diamond at 88 days to 50 percent heading, Sha said. Lodging tolerance is also similar to Diamond’s,
with a slight improvement in milling, especially head rice yield.

The experiment station released a new jasmine-type aromatic rice called ARoma 22 amid rising U.S. demand
for aromatic rice. Emeritus Professor Karen Moldenhauer and assistant breeder Debra Ahrent Wisdom
developed it to fill that demand with an improved Arkansas-adapted variety.

ARoma 22 offers superior aromatics and color consistency over earlier releases, and equals several qualities
looked for by consumers of imported Asian aromatic rice, sensory tests show.

ARoma 22 averaged 167 bushels per acre with high milling yields in five Arkansas Rice Variety Advancement
Trials. ARoma 22 reaches 50 percent heading at 88 days with “excellent” straw strength, according to data
collected from the Arkansas Uniform Rice Regional Nursery and reported in 2020 research trials.

- Fred Miller U of A System Division of Agriculture

=== New Page ===

AR Row Crops
Blog

Want to Know What is
Here is a quick look at forecast price increases in farm-related Up in AR Row Crops?

expenses as they appear in the enterprise budgets developed for the Arkansas Row Crops
2023 growing season by the University of Arkansas System Division of now has a blog that you

Look at forecast price rises from 2022 to 2023

Agriculture for farmers.

Diesel and interest will be driving costs across all crops with
about a 73 percent increase over 2022 in per-acre costs for both
in Arkansas.

Nitrogen is actually projected to be about six percent lower in
2023 relative to 2022 across all major row crops. Biram said
“this is most likely driven by the alleviation of supply chain
pressures across the globe as more product is moved.
However, the continued war in Ukraine will continue to place
upward pressure on urea and diammonium phosphate relative
to 2021.”

Corn — Seed costs for corn are projected to be about 12
percent higher over 2022; Phosphate appears to be up about
two percent while zinc sulfate is projected to be up about 15
percent over 2022.

Cotton — DAP is projected to be up about seven percent over
2022; Defoliant is projected to be up nearly 10 percent over last
year.

Rice — Insecticides and fungicides for rice are projected to be
up 98 percent and 18 percent, respectively.

Soybeans — Phosphate and potash are projected to be up 1.6
percent and 0.5 percent, respectively. Herbicides are actually
projected to be down seven percent relative to 2022 but still up
26 percent over 2021.

- Mary Hightower U o f A System Division of Agriculture

can check for weekly
market updates and
research-based crop
recommendations and
updates from our
specialists.

AR Row Crop Blog

Farmland Wanted

Need Someone to
Partner with on the
Farm?

We have a request from a
local man looking to start
row crop farming. If you
are interested or have
questions, please contact
Bobby Morrison at

(870) 552-5109.

Flow Meters
Meters Available
If you need to get your

wells checked before the
season gets too busy,
just let me know. We
have an 8” an 10” flow
meter you can check out

from our office.

=== New Page ===

2023 White County Demonstrations

It is that time of year again!! Time to get some research demonstrations
planned on your farm. Do you have any issues or challenges you would
like to have some help with? Have any burning questions or ideas that
you would like to see answered on your own farm? If so, let me know!

Current:
Wheat Verification- Shannon and Luke Feather

Upcoming:

Soybean Verification- Patrick Hambrick

Rice Verification — John Hamilton

Enlist Soybean Variety- Patrick Hambrick
Extend Flex Soybean Variety- Brandon Cain
Deer Repellent- Brad and RJ Peacock

Corn Verification- Brad and RJ Peacock
Corn Hybrid Demo- Keith and Jacob Feather
Green Seeker Demonstration- Jacob Feather
Cover Crop Moisture- Brad Peacock

Corn Ear Worm Traps- County Wide
Southwestern Corn Borer Traps- County Wide

Please, feel free to contact me for further information about the items in this
newsletter or anything else | may be able to assist you with.

Sincerely,

Stl 2 Figas

Jerrod Haynes
County Extension Agent - Agriculture
(501) 230-9974

The University of Arkansas System Division of Agriculture offers all its Extension and Research programs and
services without regard to race, color, sex, gender identity, sexual orientation, national origin, religion, age,
disability, marital or veteran status, genetic information, or any other legally protected status, and is an
Affirmative Action/Equal Opportunity Employer.

U of A Helpful Publications:
UPDATED Row Crop Plant-Back

Intervals for Common Herbicides

Max Use Rates per Application and

Per Season for Common Herbicides

Application Cut-Off Timings for

Common Herbicides