# Document 124226

am RESEARCH & EXTEN
Uneversity of Ariamany Sve

Bagworms

Jon Zawislak
Assistant Professor of Apiculture and Urban
Entomology

Bagworms can be destructive pests
on a variety of trees and

shrubs. Named for the distinctive
protective bags they construct; these
caterpillars can defoliate entire plants
if left unchecked. Learn more about
the lifecycle, behavior, and effective
control methods of this insect pest.

Read More

Half-healthy, half-sick—
taking a proper turf disease
sample...

Wendell Hutchens

Assistant Professor of Turfgrass Science
Sherrie Smith

Plant Pathology Instructor, Plant Health Clinic
Diagnostician

Turfgrass can be damaged from
countless abiotic and biotic stressors
that require rapid and accurate
diagnosis to be effectively managed.
However, it all starts with taking a
proper sample and providing ample

=== New Page ===

information to the diagnosticians.

Septoria Leaf Spot

Sherrie Smith
Plant Pathology Instructor, Plant Health Clinic
Diagnostician

The Plant Health Clinic has received
numerous samples of tomato with
severe leaf damage. Septoria Leaf
Spot caused by Septoria lycopersici is
one of the most damaging diseases
of tomato foliage. Learn more below!

Read More

Broad Mite Observed on Arkansas
Blackberry

Aaron Cato
Assistant Professor and Horticulture IPM
Specialist

Broad mite numbers are on the rise in
Arkansas and the time is now to get
out and scout your fields!

Managing Common Pumpkin
Insect Pests in Arkansas

Aaron Cato
Assistant Professor and Horticulture IPM
Specialist

=== New Page ===

It’s August now and the pumpkins
across the state have been in the
ground for a month or more. Based
on what we’ve seen in our plots and
the calls we've gotten in the last
couple of weeks, we also have many
of our usual insect pests out in full
force. Below is some advice and
guidance for some of our more
serious pests in pumpkins.

Chipmunks: Cute Pests

Becky McPeake

Professor and Extension Wildlife Specialist

These little darlings cross the line
when their tunneling causes erosion
and their activities mess up gardens
and landscapes.

5516321

What Caused This Herbicide Injury?

Tommy Butts

Assistant Professor and Extension Weed Scientist

Hannah Wright-Smith

Assistant Professor and Extension Weed Scientist

Are you a master of herbicide
symptomology? Be the first to email
Tommy Butts (tbutts@uada.edu) and
Hannah Wright-Smith
(hewright@uada.edu) with the correct
answer for this herbicide injury scenario
and win a prize. Good luck!

=== New Page ===

¢ Special topic: Wild Pigs. Human-Wildlife Interactions Journal,
Spring 2021.

e A looming fungal disease poses a major threat to North American
salamanders

e Nuisance Arthropods: Sticky Traps Useful in Accurate Detection in
Homes, Study Shows

¢ How More Growers Are Making the Transition to Biocontrol

e Field Scouting Guide: Phytophthora

© Constant
Contact

Try email marketing for free today!