# Document 124246

rf Arkansas ——
| p A ROW CROP

RESEARCH & EXTENSION Toop 4

University of Arkansas System OIE Ns

Corn and Grain Sorghum Weekly Update — Final Update

2016 Update No 20

Corn and Grain Sorghum Update — Dr. Jason Kelley (Wheat and Feed Grains Specialist)

2016 was a challenging year in much ways for Arkansas corn and grain sorghum producers. The state
average corn yield is estimated by the Arkansas Agriculture Statistics Service at 184 bu/acre; lower than
earlier yield estimates. It is estimated that 750,000 acres of corn was planted, an increase of 290,000
from the previous year. Record rainfall in March delayed corn planting until late March and also caused
many acres of early March planted corn to be replanted, especially in the southern portion of the state.
There were few windows to plant corn, with a bulk of the acres planted at the end of March and Mid-
late April. Overall, corn producers were able to get all their acreage planted in these small windows.
Rains caused soil crusting and corn emergence issues in many fields. Lower than desired plant
populations and poor emergence uniformity ultimately was a contributing factor for lower corn yields in
many areas this year. Suboptimal stands will almost always give suboptimal yields.

In Little Rock, the summer of 2016 had the warmest average high temperatures and warmest low
temperatures since 2010 according to the Little Rock National Weather Service; both are not conducive
for record corn yields. The average low temperature in Little Rock was the second highest on record for
much of the growing season. The Memphis National Weather Service indicated that Memphis had the
4" highest average temperature this summer, with 90 days of high temperatures of 90 degrees or more.
While we did not have extreme heat this year (only 5 days over 100 degrees in Little Rock), heat was
constant and was ultimately a yield limiting factor for corn. Rainfall was above average across much of
the corn growing areas of Arkansas, which is often good, but with periods of dry weather followed by
heavy rains, rainfall totals were deceptive and not as beneficial as it might seem. Seasonal rainfall totals
in Little Rock were the highest since 2009 and was the 9"" wettest summer on record. Rainfall after corn
maturity in Mid-August was detrimental to quality with some sprouting of the grain and was likely a
contributing factor to stalk rots that were more common this year. Lodging problems associated with
high winds in July and late season lodging due to stalk rots were issues for many corn growers this year
and were yield limiting factors.

=== New Page ===

Overall corn yields were lower on many farms this year than in previous years. A combination of several
factors including low plant populations, non-uniform emergence, heat (especially on later plantings), too
much rainfall (early and later in season) and lodging were limiting yields. The highest yielding corn in
2016 tended to be planted in March or early April with good plant stands on well-drained soil.

Grain sorghum acreage was much lower this year than in 2015, primarily due to lower grain prices and
the threat of sugarcane aphids. An estimated 40,000 acres were planted in 2016, compared to 450,000
acres in 2015. Grain sorghum also suffered with the wet weather early in the growing season, resulting
in poor/variable stands and poor early-season growth in some fields. Sugarcane aphids and headworms
were problematic for producers statewide, with most fields being treated at least once for both pests
during the season. With the warm and generally wet summer, foliar diseases such as anthracnose were
more a problem than normal in susceptible hybrids. The biggest struggle this year for grain sorghum
producers occurred in August just prior to harvest. A week long weather event that that brought several
inches of rain across the state caused widespread sprouting of grain in the head that was mature. Grain
sorghum planted during April through early May (recommended time) was the most impacted and this
comprised approximately 80% of the state acreage. Sprout damage levels were very high, resulting in a
majority of the grain being sold at a considerable discount. Late planted grain sorghum (after Mid-May)
was not mature enough to sprout with August rains and the quality of grain from later plantings was
good. However yields from late planting in general were not any higher or lower than early planted
fields. Overall grain sorghum yields were down considerably from last year, with the sprouting and
subsequent shattering of grain. The state average grain sorghum yield is estimated at 78 bu/acre,
down 10 bu/acre from 2015.

Corn and Grain Sorghum Research Verification — Kevin Lawson (Corn & GS Verification Coordinator)

Corn Research Verification Program (CRVP) — There were six CRVP fields in 2016. Five were harvested
for grain and one was harvested for silage. The five CRVP fields that were harvested for grain averaged

192 bushels per acre. The average planting date was April 5, with an average emergence date of April
16. The average harvest date for the five fields that were harvested for grain was September 4. A warm
early spring encouraged early planting this year. The April 5 average planting date is the second earliest
planting date in the last 10 years of verification. After fields were planted, cool and rainy weather
brought less than ideal conditions. The Clay County field was replanted due to heavy rains, and the
Lincoln County field saw some rootless corn syndrome. Sidedress and herbicide applications were
applied without too much problem. Once irrigation started many of the field’s experienced hot
conditions. Not much rain fell during the majority of the summer, but near maturity the rains came
back. From maturity to harvest an average of 5 inches of rain fell. This caused a delay in harvest. Rain
soaked fields wouldn’t dry down and the moisture seemed to just stay in the lower 20’s. Lodging in
some fields started showing up and became a concern. Harvest started by the end of August and yields
were lower than what was expected earlier in the year.

=== New Page ===

A Final Yield adjusted to
County Hybrid Harvest Date 15.5% moisture
Clay Pioneer 1637YHR September 13 175 bu/ac
Lincoln DKC 66-87 VT2P August 25 226 bu/ac
Pope Pioneer 1319HR July 25 36 tons/ac
Prairie Armor 1555PRO2 September 3 192 bu/ac
River Valley Terral REV 23BHR55 September 14 192 bu/ac
St Francis Pioneer 2089YHR August 31 172 bu/ac
Average Average
Average CRVP | Average CRVP Average CRVP . .
Planting Date | Emergence Date Harvest Date sei 2 SEMEL
8 8 (bu/ac) (bu/ac)
2016 April 5 April 16 September 4 192 184
2015 April 16 April 24 August 30 191 181
5 Year . .
Average April 9 April 19 September 5 213 183
10 Year . .
AyTEEO April 10 April 19 September 5 203 168
Grain Sorghum Research Verification Program (GSRVP) — The two GSRVP fields were planted in

Jefferson and White Counties. The two fields averaged 61.7 bushels per acre. Each of the fields had
unique problems. The Jefferson County field had emergence problems. The final plant population was
37,000 plants per acre but was uniform enough to keep. The White County field was a dryland field that
missed timely rains and also experienced herbicide drift early in the year that limited yield potential.

The biggest issue came later in the season after the fields were mature. Mid-August rains caused high

levels of grain sprouting in the head, which resulted in poor grain quality and yield loss due to

shattering. Sugarcane aphids were present in both fields, but after sprouting of the grain, they were

not treated.

. Final Yield adjusted to
County Hybrid Harvest Date 14% moisture
Jefferson Armor Maverick September 15 75.2 bu/ac
White Pioneer 83P99 September 6 48.1 bu/ac

=== New Page ===

Southeast Arkansas Update — Kevin Norton (Ashley County)

We had a lot of highs and low with this year's corn crop. Overall, corn yields were down 30 - 40 bushels
per acre. Yields ranged from 235 - 150 bushels per acre. Low stand counts, down corn and replants
suffered the worse. Weather issues at planting and prolonged rains in August took a heavy toll on yield.

We had a limited amount of grain sorghum in Ashley County, what was harvested before the August
rains yielded 120 - 130 bushels per acre. Yields dropped off at least 40 bushels after the rains.

Central Arkansas Update — Brett Gordon (White County)

Corn and grain sorghum harvest is almost complete in White County. Overall, the corn crop was average
for most producers. Yields in the county ranged from 170 to 200 bushels per acre. Grain sorghum was
hit hard by late season rainfall. Luckily, very little grain sorghum was planted in the county. The grain
sorghum sprouted on the head causing significant yield loss (at least 30% if not more). Sugarcane aphids
were at treatment threshold, but producers were reluctant to make insecticide investments after the
sprouting occurred.

Northeast Arkansas Update — Stewart Runsick (Clay County)

Corn and grain sorghum harvest is nearing completion. There are still a few fields out there left to
harvest. Yields have been mediocre to average for corn and poor for grain sorghum. | have heard a lot
of 175 to 200 bushel corn. The highest yields reported were around 230 bushels per acre. Stand was
the difference for most fields. We experienced a lot of uneven emergence and skippy stands due to wet
cold conditions early. Even the replant corn struggled. Fields with even emergence and stands above
30,000 plants per acre were better. The rainfall really affected the grain sorghum yields. The earliest
sorghum sprouted on the head and fell off resulting in 30% to 50% yield loss. In the later planted
sorghum grain quality was better, but the yields were still low. A few fields lodged. Most of it was
sprayed for sugarcane aphids and head worms.

River Valley Update — Kevin VanPelt (Conway County)

The corn harvest was finally completed last week. Producers got off to a good start and had a really
good growing season in the River Valley, but by late July the weather started causing problems. Storms
with high winds laid corn down in some areas and southern rust started showing up, but didn't get bad
enough that anyone had to treat. Then just as the majority of the corn acreage was reaching black layer
in August, continual rains started followed by a week or two of humid conditions which prevented
drying down still further. There was some sprouting in the ears that occurred as of this, but not a
significant amount. The overall averages reported by producers have fallen in the 170-180 bushels per
acre range.

=== New Page ===

Twitter
Jason Kelley @AR_Feedgrains
Kevin Lawson @ar_cornverify
Row Crop Verification @ar_verification

University of Arkansas Systems Division of Agriculture Cooperative Extension Service Web Pages
Extension Corn Webpage — www.uaex.edu/corn
Extension Grain Sorghum Webpage — www.uaex.edu/grain-sorghum
Row Crop Verification Webpage — www.uaex.edu/verification
Corn & Grain Sorghum Verification Webpage — www.uaex.edu/cgsrvp