# Document 124398

DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE
Ut RESEARCH & EXTENSION
University of Arkansas System

Days
Grazing
Program

=== New Page ===

“The field is more productive
than ever, the cattle look great

and we have used less fertilizer.”
~ Shari Swenson, Van Buren County

=== New Page ===

Livestock producers continue to suffer from

increasing input costs. Never in history have the
costs of feed, fertilizer and fuel increased so
dramatically over a short period of time. As a result
__ of increased input cost, producers are challenged
to determine what management adjustments are
right for their operation. Some have already chosen
not to purchase expensive fertilizer, while others
reduced the amount of fertilizer based upon what
they could afford. Some producers have adjusted livestock numbers, while others
cut costs in other areas. Regardless of how livestock producers elect to manage
their costs, production may be negatively impacted, and many livestock producers
will be faced with economic losses in the coming years.

Stockpiled forages

Stockpiling forage is allowing forage growth to accumulate in one season to use for
grazing in a later season. Forages grown in late summer and fall can be deferred
for grazing until late fall or winter. This is generally a more cost-effective practice than
feeding hay and supplement. Further savings can be realized when considering
grazing takes less time, labor, fuel and equipment than moving and feeding hay.
Less hay is needed, which reduces hay production costs and allows producers to
focus on quality of hay produced.

Stockpiled warm season forages

+ The average savings for stockpiling bermudagrass compared to feeding hay
averaged $12, $42 and $52 per animal unit (AU; AU = 1,000 Ib cow) in 2008, 2009
and 2010, respectively.

In an effort to help livestock producers with managing their “bottom line,” the 300
Day Grazing Program was developed. Since the cost of feed, fertilizer and fuel have
increased, the goal of the 300 Day Grazing Program was to implement management
changes to enhance the utilization of forages and reduce dependency on
supplemental feed and fuel.

Farm demonstrations were developed using management practices to increase the
number of grazing days, reduce the need for nitrogen fertilizer and to improve storing
and hay feeding efficiency. These demonstrations are designed to measure impacts
in order to determine savings or improved returns over conventional management.
The demonstrations include stockpiled forages (warm-season and cool-season),
improving grazing management (rotational grazing) complementary forages (winter
and summer annuals), legume establishment and efficient hay management
(storage and feeding). In addition, whole farm demonstrations were conducted.

Stockpiled cool season forages

+ The average savings for stockpiling fescue compared to feeding hay averaged
$42, $54 and $48 per animal unit in 2008, 2009 and 2010, respectively.

+ The greatest savings documented was $83.50/AU, which came from a farm that

strip-grazed stockpiled fescue/white clover and did not need to apply N fertilizer.

“By stockpiling fescue, I have
cut the number of hay feeding
days in half, saving me over

$3,500.”
~ Lee Jones, Washington County

3

=== New Page ===

Improving grazing management

Rotational or controlled grazing can potentially increase forage
availability over a continuous grazing by more than 50 percent.
Because of the increase in forage availability, several
management options to potentially increase profitability
become available. These options include increasing the
number of cattle, grazing flexibility, stockpiling forage,
extending grazing during drought, reduced input costs and
time savings.

Controlled grazing management systems emphasize providing
adequate forage availability and forage quality to meet the
nutritional needs of livestock, promoting forage stand
persistence and species diversity. With controlled grazing
management systems, the producer decides when a pasture has been grazed close
enough without negatively affecting animal performance. At this point, livestock can
be moved to a different pasture. With this system of grazing a pasture for a period
of time and then resting it while livestock are grazing other pastures, forage re-
growth can occur.

+ Ameat goat producer saved $1,079 on 800 feet of new fencing, compared to the
cost of traditional fence required to contain the livestock.

+ “_.. My pastures had less weeds, and the lespedeza forage is better than ever.
My cost for parasite control in the goats decreased by $160 due to the improved
pasture management” - Jeff Barksdale, Faulkner County registered Boer goat
producer

“I got more grazing days for my
meat goats and could graze more

Program.”
~ Jeff Barksdale, Faulkner County

Fifteen producers
saved an averaged
$0.68 per foot, for a
total savings of

animals than I could before $17,274 by using

0 0 lectric fenci th

starting the 300 Day Grazing ee at
fencing.

+ Livestock water tanks
were made from large
machinery tires. Twenty
tire tanks were installed, saving $790 per tank, for a total savings of $15,640 over
the cost of using traditional freeze proof tanks.

* “The improving grazing management project has been a successful project in
my eyes. After | began to rotate my herd, | saw that | had parts of my fields that
could be utilized for other things, such as hay cutting. Even though the weather
played a big part on hay feeding, | did not start feeding hay until early December,
and | attribute this mostly to the project. Lastly, since starting this project, | was so
impressed with the versatility of electric fencing that | enrolled in the EQIP program
designated to electric fencing and have built approximately 1 mile of electric fence
on my property ...” - Judge Floyd Nutt - Calhoun County

=== New Page ===

Forages (summer and winter) can be sod-seeded
into dormant grasses to provide grazing during a
period when perennial forages are unavailable.
These annuals can be seeded as mixtures or in
monoculture and can be no-till drilled into sod or
seeded into prepared seedbeds. Regardless of the
establishment method, warm- and cool-season
annuals have excellent forage quality
characteristics and are good forage options for
filling the gaps in a 300-day grazing system.

entary Forages

Winter annuals

+ Savings from using winter annuals compared to feeding hay averaged $62 and
$55 per AU in 2009 and 2010, respectively.

Summer annuals

* Crabgrass planted in the spring of 2010 had 80% coverage by the end of summer.
The addition of crabgrass helped extend the grazing season by providing grazing
when other forages were not actively growing. Enough forage was produced to not
only graze the crabgrass but also hay rather than to feed hay during this period.

Efficient Hay Management

Although the goal of the 300 Day Grazing Program is to reduce the dependency of
feeding harvested forages (hay), hay feeding will not be eliminated. Therefore, how
hay is stored and fed determines how much hay must be harvested. Hay storage
practices can impact how much hay is available for winter feeding. In addition, hay
feeding practices can affect wastage and inefficiencies which in turn determines
how much hay has to be harvested. Practices should be implemented to reduce
hay loss during storage and feeding.

Hay storage

+ Hay storage demonstrations showed a range of losses for hay stored outside
and unprotected from a minimum of 1% to 23%. Hay protected in a barn or under
a tarp lost 1% to 15% of dry matter. The 15% loss associated with protected hay was
due to storing hay under a cheap tarp that deteriorated quickly with UV exposure.
* Comparing the highest loss (23%) associated with unprotected hay to the average
loss (7%), the value of hay storage losses when hay is worth $30/bale was
$4.84/bale.

Hay feeding

* Hay feeding demonstrations showed that processing hay and feeding the hay in
solid-sided feeders resulted in hay feeding losses below 1%, whereas feeding round
bale hay unprotected resulted in a 42% hay feeding loss.

+ Feeding round bale hay in a ring feeder reduced waste to 13%, and unrolling
hay produced a waste of 24%.

=== New Page ===

sEegumes Establishment

r Clovers and other legumes are highly desirable species in pastures and hay meadows.
They serve several useful functions. Legumes fix nitrogen from air through their
symbiotic relationship with Rhizobium bacteria and, therefore, are not dependent on
nitrogen fertilizer. The fixed nitrogen is used first to support clover growth, but it becomes
available to neighboring grass plants when clover tissue dies or is recycled by grazing
livestock. A second valuable role of legumes is to increase pasture forage quality, and
as a third advantage, legumes can help sustain forage supplies over the grazing season
by providing forage at a time when other species are not as productive.

White clover stands planted in March 2009 improved to over 50% coverage by
September 2009, and red clover planted in March 2010 averaged 60% coverage for the year.

* In 2009, 2010 and 2011, producers completing the legume demonstration documented an average savings of
$917, $4,600 and $8,276, respectively, over the cost of nitrogen fertilizer.

+ “This field is more productive than ever, the cattle look great, and we have used less fertilizer.” - Shari Swenson

“I will keep using the
practices that this
project has taught.”
~ Judge Floyd Nutt,
Calhoun County

300 Day Grazing Whole Farm Demos

All of the 300 Day Grazing Program demonstrations had a positive impact on Van Buren County - Practices Implemented
increasing the number of grazing days, reducing nitrogen fertilizer needs, or + 75% fescue/clover and 25% bermudagrass

improving hay management efficiency. Implementing one of these demonstrations + Rotational grazing with single high tensile and temporary electric wire
may not reach the goal of 300 days of grazing. Three farms were selected to + Strip-grazing stockpiled fescue

demonstrate how these management practices can be implemented cumulatively to + Crabgrass
achieve 300 days of grazing. The 300 Day Grazing Whole Farm Program is a three- + Qverseeded white clover

year commitment.
. Results
Tecra 2c SM SIM Le * Year 1 = 312 days of grazing and saved $84/AU (2009/10)
* 55% fescue/clover and 45% bermudagrass + Year 2 = 280 days of grazing and saved more than $4,700 (2010/11)

* Rotational grazing with temporary electric wire

* Strip-grazing stockpiled fescue and bermudagrass
* Overseeded red and white clover

Results

+ Year 1 = 335 days of grazing and saved more than $2,200 (2008/09) * Overseeded white clover
+ Year 2 = 350 days of grazing and saved more than $8,000 (2009/10)

* Year 3 = 275 days of grazing (2010/11) Results

Randolph County - Practices Implemented
* 55% fescue/clover, 25% bermudagrass/lespedeza and 20% mixed grasses
* Rotational grazing with temporary electric wire

* Year 1 = 310 days of grazing (2009/10)
* Year 2 = 300 days of grazing (2010/11)
6 * Savings of more than $17,000 on hay cost

=== New Page ===

In an effort to help livestock producers better
manage their “bottom line,” a herd of 38 fall-calving
cows was managed under the 300-day grazing
demonstration protocols. The concept was to plan
forage production in seasonal blocks of summer,
fall, winter and spring to match the fall-calving herd.
The goals of the program were to 1) enhance
forage utilization, 2) demonstrate efficient and
targeted fertilizer use, 3) reduce hay feeding to
60 d or less, 4) maintain 90% net calf-crop and 5) wean an average weight of 550
pounds.

Results
+ The number of cattle grazed increased 18% and the number of AU increased 26%
from year 1 to 3.

Summary

* Total direct savings to producers for the three year period was $191,727.

* Due to the severe weather conditions of 2010, producers employing practices of
this program had much better forage production compared to producers not enrolled
in the program.

* NRCS used the results of the 300 Day Grazing Program as a foundation to revise
EQIP programs and develop the Prescribed Grazing cost-share practice, which is
targeted at grazing systems. The Prescribed Grazing practice offers incentives to
producers to implement rotational grazing, planting of legumes, proper hay feeding,
stockpiling of forage and other recommended forage management practices.

+ The mature cow calf-crop percentage increased from 84% in year 1 to 97% in
year 3.

+ Direct expenses decreased by 49%/AU from year 1 to year 3.

* Herd breakeven (total specified cost divided by pounds of beef sold) decreased
29% from year 1 to year 3.

* The average adjusted 205-d weaning weight in year 1 was 437 lbs and improved
to 507 in year 3.

* The overall cow efficiency (calf-adjusted 205-d wt/cow wt at weaning) improved
from 43% (year 1) to 50% (year 3).

+ Weaning weight improved from 471 Ibs (year 1) to 603 Ibs (year 3). The average
value of the entire calf crop increased $11,544 (59%) from year 1 to year 3.

* Year 1 = 347 days of grazing (2008/09)

* Year 2 = 311 days of grazing (2009/10)

+ Year 3 = 330 days of grazing (2010/11)

* Areport from NRCS documented that more than 115,223 acres of grazing for
livestock was managed to improve the quality and quantity of feed on 1,536 farms.
Forage grasses were established on more than 7,310 acres to improve livestock
nutrition and health on 408 farms. Almost 1 million feet of fencing and 316 water
facilities were installed to improve grazing management on 240 farms.

+ In 2010, producers received EQIP cost-share funds of more than $3.2 million for
prescribed grazing, fencing, pasture planting and improved watering facilities to
improve grazing systems.

=== New Page ===

DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE
Ut RESEARCH & EXTENSION
University of Arkansas System

The Division of Agriculture offers its programs to all eligible persons regardless of race, color, national origin, religion, gender, age, disability, marital or veteran status, or any
other legally protected status, and is an Affirmative Action/Equal Opportunity Employer.