# Document 124586

Agriculture and Natural Resources

DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE
Ut RESEARCH & EXTENSION
University of Arkansas System

FSA7084

Kudzu Bug — Invasive Pest Coming to
Arkansas and the Impact on Soybeans

Gus Lorenz
Professor -
Extension Entomologist

Glenn Studebaker
Associate Professor -
Extension Entomologist

Nicki Taillon
Program Technician -
Entomology

David Mason

State Survey Coordinator,
Arkansas State Plant
Board

Joel Bard
State Plant Health
Director, APHIS

Arkansas Is
Our Campus

Visit our web site at:
https:/Awww.uaex.uada.edu

It’s only a matter of time
before the kudzu bug finds its way
to Arkansas. After initially being
found in Georgia in 2009, the kudzu
bug is now established and causing
problems in Virginia, North and South
Carolina, Florida and Alabama.
Kudzu bug has since moved into east
Tennessee and recently into western
Mississippi (Vicksburg). Obviously,
it won't be long before the bug will
be found here in the Natural State.
Surveys were conducted in 2012
concentrating on counties with major
corridors from the east: Interstate 40
(Crittenden County), Highway 49
(Phillips County) and Highways 159,
65 and 82 (Ashley and Chicot Coun-
ties). Surveys indicated no kudzu
bugs in the state at that time.

However, it seems inevitable that
kudzu bug will make its way into
Arkansas. Although the kudzu bug
is as much a nuisance pest for home-
owners and gardeners, for the purpose
of this fact sheet, we will concentrate
on the impact of this invasive pest
in soybeans.

History of Kudzu Bug

The kudzu bug, Megacopta
cribraria, also referred to as the
bean plataspid, globular stink bug
and lablab bug, is native to India and
China and is found throughout the
Far East. It was initially found in
the U.S. in 2009 and has spread

quickly across the Southeast. It is
now well established in Tennessee
and Alabama. Based on experience,
once it is detected in an area, it is
possible to see economic damage the
next season.

Figure 2. Relative size of kudzu bug

Identification and Biology

Adult kudzu bugs are pea-sized,
about 1/6-1/4" long (4 to 6 mm), some-
what oblong in shape with a wide
posterior and olive-green colored with
brown speckles (see Figures 1 and 2).
The kudzu bug appears to waddle
when it walks and is an excellent flier.
They are “true bugs,” having piercing-
sucking mouthparts.

University of Arkansas, United States Department of Agriculture, and County Governments Cooperating

=== New Page ===

Figure 3. Kudzu bug
eggs

Figure 4. Kudzu bug nymph

Kudzu bugs overwinter as adults. In early spring
they become active and seek reproductive plant hosts,
such as kudzu and soybeans. Adults may feed on
many different plants while in search of a reproduc-
tive host. Overwintered adults often infest kudzu and
begin feeding and laying eggs (Figure 3). However,
some overwintered adults may infest soybeans.
Soybeans appear to become attractive to adults at the
V-3 growth stage. Overwintered adults live and lay
eggs for many weeks. Development from egg to adult
takes 6-8 weeks in the spring and about 6 weeks in
the summer months as temperatures warm. In
Georgia, two generations occurred during 2010
and 2011.

Injury and Pest Status of
Kudzu Bug

Adults and immature insects (nymphs, Figure 4)
gather in large groups and suck sap from a host
plant, weakening and stunting it (Figure 5). Adults
have been observed sucking sap from the host plant’s
leaves, stems, budding flowers and mature green
pods. Severe infestations of adults and nymphs feed-
ing on leaf sap can cause extensive defoliation in

host plants.

Injury to plants likely results from nutrient and
moisture loss, rather than a direct loss of biomass
from removal of plant tissue. Furthermore, sooty
mold can develop on the leaves from the sugary
excretion of the insect, reducing photosynthetic
output. On soybeans, the kudzu bug adults and

nymphs feed on stems (last-instar nymphs with

purplish wing pads), while small nymphs have been
observed feeding on leaf veins (Figure 6).

Yield data collected from trials in Georgia
and South Carolina indicate an average yield loss
of 18 percent, with a range of 0-47 percent on

unprotected soybeans.

Excessive kudzu bug feeding negatively impacts
soybean yield by reducing the number of pods per
plant, reducing beans per pod and/or reducing seed
size. Yield loss is likely due to the physiological
timing when stress occurs on the soybean plant.
These yield loss components are very similar to what
we observe on soybeans that are drought stressed.

Figure 5. Large numbers of kudzu bug infesting
soybeans

Figure 6. Kudzu bug injury from feeding on soybeans

=== New Page ===

Scouting and Threshold for
Kudzu Bug

Kudzu bugs can be scouted using a 15-inch
diameter sweep net. Kudzu bug populations can be
extremely large, especially on field edges. We are
suggesting a threshold of one immature kudzu bug
per sweep. This suggested threshold is based on field
trials in Georgia where a single properly timed insec-
ticide application preserved soybean yield. In the
majority of trials conducted, nymphs usually appear
at about the R-2 to R-3 growth stage. If adult
numbers are extremely large (multiple adults per
sweep) and soybeans are stressed, treatment should
be considered; this is a judgment call, but the idea is
to avoid bug-induced stress on soybeans that are also
stressed for some other reason. Be advised that
treatments for kudzu bug may disrupt the soybean
ecosystem by reducing beneficial insects and may

enhance establishment of caterpillar pests, such as
corn earworm, soybean looper and armyworms.

Controlling Kudzu Bug in Soybeans

Efficacy data from trials conducted in Georgia
and South Carolina indicate that several insecticides
provide very effective control. However, like other
insect pests, coverage and penetration of the canopy
are extremely important in achieving acceptable
levels of control. The following table is a list of insec-
ticides that are currently labeled for soybeans. The
last column shows the percent control (based on trials
from other states) of several selected insecticides. It
appears that Bifenthrin (Brigade, Discipline, Fanfare,
etc.) provides good control along with premixes such
as Endigo (lambda-cyhalothrin plus thiamethoxam),
Brigadier (bifenthrin plus imidacloprid) and Hero

(bifenthrin and zeta-cypermethrin).

Table 1. Insecticides Currently Labeled for Soybeans With Activity on Kudzu Bug

Insecticide

% Control
(2-5 DAT)

Rate Range
(per acre)

Asana XL

5.8-9.6 oz 72

Baythroid XL

1.6-2.8 oz 65

Belay

3-6 0z 62

Brigade, Discipline, Fanfare, Sniper

2.1-6.4 0z

Brigadier

5.1-6.4 oz 91

Cobalt Advanced

6-38 oz 82

Declare

1.28-1.54 oz 85

Dimethoate

1.0 pt 84

Endigo

4-4.5 oz 92

Hero

4.0-10.3 oz 96

Karate

1.6-1.92 oz 89

Karate + Orthene

0.5-1.0 Ib 94

Leverage

2.8 OZ 53

Lorsban Chlorpyrifos

0.5-1.0 pt 75

Methyl Parathion

1-2 pt 80

Mustang Max

3.2-4.0 0z 81

Orthene

0.5-1.0 Ib ai 81

Sevin XLR

1.0 pt 90

Stallion (chlorpyrifos + zeta-cypermethrin)

9.25-11.75 oz 69

=== New Page ===

Acknowledgments

Kudzu Bug - Identification and Control in Soybeans.
United Soybean Board.
www.kudzubug.org/grower.html

Kudzu Bug. University of Georgia.
http://www.kudzubug.org/grower.html
Reisig, D., and J. Bacheler. 2012. Kudzu bug

(Megacopta cribraria) a new potentially

devastating pest of soybeans. North Carolina FS.
Roberts, P. Kudzu Bug Management. 2012.
Agent Update.

Photo Credits:
Rice, Marlin, Biologist, Pioneer Seed. Figures 1, 2, 4,
5 and 6. Clemson University, Figure 3.

All chemical information is given with the understanding that no endorsement of named products is intended, nor is criticism implied
of similar products that are not mentioned. Before purchasing or using any pesticide, always read and carefully follow the directions

on the container label.

Printed by University of Arkansas Cooperative Extension Service Printing Services.

DR. GUS LORENZ, professor - Extension entomologist, and
NICKI TAILLON, program technician - entomology, are located
in Lonoke. DR. GLENN STUDEBAKER, associate professor -
Extension entomologist is located in Keiser. They are with the
University of Arkansas Division of Agriculture. DAVID MASON is
state survey coordinator with the Arkansas State Plant Board and
is located in Little Rock. JOEL BARD is state plant health direc-
tor with the Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service (APHIS)
and is located in Little Rock.

FSA7084-PD-3-13N

Issued in furtherance of Cooperative Extension work, Acts of May 8
and June 30, 1914, in cooperation with the U.S. Department of
Agriculture, Director, Cooperative Extension Service, University of
Arkansas. The Arkansas Cooperative Extension Service offers its
programs to all eligible persons regardless of race, color, national
origin, religion, gender, age, disability, marital or veteran status,
or any other legally protected status, and is an Affirmative
Action/Equal Opportunity Employer.