# Document 124627

11 - Estimating Production Costs for
Corn in Arkansas

Tony Windham

Corn production cost estimates are published
each year by the University of Arkansas Coopera-
tive Extension Service. The most recent edition of
these publications can be located on the Cooperative
Extension Service web site at:

http://www.aragriculture.org/farmplanning/
Budgets/default.asp

Enterprise budgets represent a type of
information that can be used by a wide variety of
individuals in making decisions in the agricultural
industry. They are used:

¢ by farmers for planning,

¢ by Extension personnel in providing educational
programs to farmers,

¢ _ by lenders as a basis for credit,

¢ to provide basic data for research and

¢ to inform non-farmers of the costs incurred by
farmers in the production of food and fiber
crops.

The purpose of these publications is to provide
a systematic procedure for estimating the cost of
producing corn. Users of this information should
think of these budgets as a first approximation and
then make appropriate adjustments using the
“YOUR FARM” column provided on each budget
to add, delete or change costs to reflect the specific
situations. For example, each of these corn
enterprise budgets includes an estimated drying
cost. Many producers believe this cost can be
reduced by allowing the crop to dry in the field

prior to harvest. However, since these estimates are
intended to be a planning guide, drying costs are
included which allows the user the opportunity to
make adjustments.

Each budget estimates the direct and fixed
expenses associated with producing corn. Input
price data used in estimating direct costs are
updated annually by obtaining prices from farm
input suppliers throughout the crop’s production
area. Quantities of inputs are based on the
recommendations of Extension and Research faculty
within the Division of Agriculture. Data obtained
from the Corn Research Verification Program is also
used in developing these estimates.

Fixed expenses include depreciation, interest,
taxes and insurance and represent an average cost
allocated over the entire useful life of the
machinery. Various financing arrangements and tax
depreciation methods can produce costs that vary
significantly from these estimates in a given year.
The ability to estimate the actual cost is a complex
economic procedure whereby cash accounting and
economic costs may vary greatly.

Each budget also includes a sequential listing of
all operations used in the estimation procedure. This
information can be used to determine the cost of a
specific tillage operation, pesticide application or
irrigation practice. The user can also compare the
number of tillage operations or irrigations with their
own expectations.

87