# Document 124908

DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE
Ut RESEARCH & EXTENSION
University of Arkansas System

Agriculture and Natural Resources

FSA7083

Managing Armyworms
in Pastures and Hayfields

Kelly Loftin
Associate Professor and
Extension Entomologist

Introduction

Two species of armyworms can be
significant pests of Arkansas forage
and pasture production. Both species
belong in the family Noctuidae along
with other garden and agronomic
pests such as cutworms, bollworms
and budworms.

Gus Lorenz
Professor - Extension
Entomologist and IPM
Coordinator

In Arkansas, the “true” armyworm
(Pseudaletia unipuncta) is more of a
spring pest of cool-season grasses
and tall fescue. The fall armyworm
(FAW) (Spodoptera frugiperda) is
a summer/fall pest primarily of
bermudagrass, but it can also damage
fall-seeded, newly established winter
annuals, fescue and orchardgrass.

Ricky Corder
Program Associate -
Entomology

In southern Arkansas, we can
expect to see fall armyworm damage
in bermudagrass as early as July.
True armyworms are more of an
issue in northern and central
Arkansas, primarily on fescue (and
fescue grown for seed) but will also
damage other grasses and small
grains. True armyworms may not
reach pest status every
year, partially as a result
of mortality from natural
predators and pathogens.
In contrast, we can expect
to have fall armyworm
damage in south Arkansas
forage about every year. In
recent years, we have also
witnessed significant fall
armyworm damage in
central and north
Arkansas. Other army-
worms such as the yellow
striped armyworm

Arkansas Is
Our Campus

Visit our web site at:
https://(www.uaex.uada.edu

(Spodoptera ornithogalli) and beet
armyworm (Spodoptera exigua) may
attack forages but seldom reach pest
status on Arkansas forage.

Damage from true armyworm
and fall armyworm can seem to
appear overnight. Although the
damage might appear overnight,
larvae have likely been feeding for a
week or more before they or their
damage appear. This is because when
the worms are small (early instars)
they do not eat much. It is not until
the fifth and sixth instar that the
caterpillars begin consuming large
amounts of forage (Figure 1). In addi-
tion, large armyworms may move
into an uninfested field (or area of a
field) adjacent to a field that was just
defoliated. Because armyworms are
so destructive and compete with live-
stock for forage, producers should
diligently scout susceptible fields for
the true armyworm beginning in
April and for the fall armyworm
beginning in July.

Figure 1. Relative amounts of food eaten by a fall
armyworm caterpillar during each growth stage. Kathy
Flanders, Auburn University

University of Arkansas, United States Department of Agriculture, and County Governments Cooperating

=== New Page ===

Description

Egg: Fall Armyworm and True Armyworm.
The FAW egg is creamy white and dome-shaped
with a flattened base. The egg curves upward to — ia
form a broadly rounded apex. Eggs are laid in y ~
masses of 50 or more on lower leaf blades, primarily j
in areas of lush growth. The egg mass (usually laid
in a single layer) is covered with gray scales, which
gives the mass a furry appearance (Figure 2). True

armyworm eggs look similar and are laid in masses = =
in dense, grassy vegetation. Figure 4. Fully grown fall armyworm larva. Note set of four

dots on the end of the abdomen. Kathy Flanders, Auburn
University

Larva (caterpillar): True Armyworm. Newly-
hatched true armyworm larvae are similar in
appearance to the fall armyworm. As the true army-
worm grows and molts, key characteristics become
more visible. Its head is greenish brown with dark
streaks (mottled appearance). The body is greenish
brown to black with paired dark markings. True
armyworm larvae exhibit paired, black triangular
spots along the back of each abdominal segment and
a thin yellow line running lengthwise through each
row of spots (Figure 5) that distinguish them from
other armyworm larvae. A fully grown true army-
worm larva is about 1% inches long.

Figure 2. Armyworm egg mass. Scott Akin,
University of Arkansas

Larva (caterpillar): Fall Armyworm. When
newly hatched, the fall armyworm larva is light
green to cream-colored with a dark head capsule and
measures approximately %+ inch long. As the larva
feeds and molts, it becomes darker with light-colored
lines down the sides of its body. The head capsule is
dark with a light-colored Y mark on the front. In
addition, the top portion of the next to last abdom-
inal segment has four small dark dots. The inverted
Y on the head capsule (Figure 3) and four dots on
the abdomen are good characteristics to distinguish
the fall armyworm from the true armyworm
(Figure 4). A fully grown fall armyworm larva is 5364223

about 1% inches long. Figure 5. True armyworm showing the dark spots along the
back. Frank Peairs, Colorado State University

Pupa: Fall Armyworm and True Armyworm.
Pupae of the two species are very similar in
appearance. They are reddish brown and about
% inch long (Figure 6). Pupation normally takes
place in the upper portion of the soil when fully
developed larvae
burrow into the soil
and construct an
oval, loose cocoon. If
soil conditions are
Figure 3. Inverted “Y” on the head of fall armyworm. too hard, the cocoon
may be formed on [=
the soil surface. Figure 6. Armyworm pupa.

=== New Page ===

Adult: Fall Armyworm. The adult fall armyworm
is an ash-gray moth with a 1%-inch wingspan. It has
mottled front wings with whitish spots near the tip.
Its hind wings are whitish with narrow brownish
wing edges.

Adult: True Armyworm. The adult true
armyworm is light brown or tan with a salmon-
colored apostrophe or exclamation mark on the
center of the front wing. It is similar to the fall
armyworm adult in size.

Biology

Fall armyworms and true armyworms have a
similar life cycle, except that the fall armyworms do
not overwinter in Arkansas. Even the mildest of
Arkansas’ winters is too cold for the fall armyworm
to survive. Fall armyworms can overwinter in
southern Florida, southern Texas and in Central and
South America. They make their way to Arkansas on
wind currents from the south. Initial moth flights,
which vary in size and timing, will influence
severity and timing of fall armyworm outbreaks.
Unlike the nocturnal true armyworms, fall army-
worm caterpillars feed any time of the day or night
but are most active early in the morning or late in
the evening.

Life cycle: Fall Armyworm. Female armyworm
moths lay egg masses of fifty to several hundred eggs
at night, usually on foliage or sometimes on light-
colored objects (Figure 2). Often eggs are laid in
areas of the pasture with the most lush growth. Total
egg production per female ranges from about 1,500
to 2,000.

Eggs hatch into small (% inch) light green
caterpillars usually within 2 to 4 days (Figure 7).
Beginning in the second and continuing into the
third instar, the fall armyworm larva turns
brownish. The first instar through the fifth instar
each lasts from about 1.5 to 3 days; the sixth instar
will last nearly 4 days. During the summer months,

Figure 7. First instar armyworms. Eric Howard, University of
Arkansas

larvae require about 12 to 16 days to reach the
full 1% inch size. During cooler weather larval
development may be extended to about 30 days.
Fully grown larvae transform into pupae on or in
the soil. The pupal period lasts about 9 days. Adult
moths emerge from pupae, mate and begin laying
eggs in about 3 days. Although the female FAW can
live about 2 weeks, most of her eggs are laid within
the first week of her life. Adult FAW moths are
nocturnal. In Arkansas, the FAW occurs in waves of
about 30 days apart. It is not uncommon to have
three generations in southern Arkansas. Finding
mixed sizes (small and large) of caterpillars indicates
that overlapping generations are present.

Life cycle: True Armyworm. The life cycle of
the true armyworm is similar to that of the FAW.
However, because true armyworms are present
during cooler periods (spring), their development
period (which is temperature dependent) is a little
longer than that of the FAW. When temperatures are
warmer, a generation will take about 40 days, but
about 60 days when temperatures are cooler.

Habits and Damage

Fall Armyworm. Fall armyworm damage often
appears as a browned or burned-out patch resembling
drought damage (Figure 8). The damaged patch will
usually increase in size as the fall armyworm con-
sumes more foliage. The brown color results from
drying of the plant due to dehydration after army-
worms chew tender growth. Often, after a severe fall
armyworm infestation, the only vegetation left in the
field will be tough stems. Fall armyworms seldom kill
healthy, established bermudagrass. However, newly
established stands of bermudagrass, winter annuals
(rye, ryegrass, wheat), fescue or orchardgrass are at
risk of stunting or dying.

Figure 8. Fall armyworm damage on closely mowed grass.
The brown patches resemble drought damage. Kathy
Flanders, Auburn University

Fall armyworm outbreaks are more likely during
periods of drought because some of their natural
enemies are less active during droughts. Fall army-
worm outbreaks in Arkansas often occur as the grass

=== New Page ===

greens from rain that has broken a prolonged dry
period. Fall armyworm outbreaks (Figure 9) may
occur as early as July and continue into the fall. Well-

fertilized bermudagrass seems to be the preferred fall
armyworm habitat. Although fall armyworms feed
more actively in early morning and late afternoon,
they may eat throughout most of the day in tall
forage. Fall armyworms often conceal themselves
during the brightest part of the day.

Figure 9. Fall armyworms in a sweep net during an
armyworm outbreak.

True Armyworm. Similar to fall armyworm
damage, true armyworm damage seems to appear
overnight and for the same reasons. The large cater-
pillars (fifth and sixth instars) consume large
amounts of forage very quickly, whereas small cater-
pillars consume very little. In addition, true army-
worms feed at night. In contrast to fall armyworms,
true armyworms do not normally feed on bermuda-
grass. Instead, they primarily feed on fescue and
other cool-season grasses. In severe infestations on
fescue grown for seeds, seed heads may be cut from
the stem and significantly decrease seed yield.
Although true armyworms can have two to three
generations per year, typically only the first genera-
tion causes significant damage to forage. True army-
worms tend to avoid forage containing legumes, such
as alfalfa and clover.

Natural Enemies

Natural enemies — parasites, predators and
pathogens — occur and can possibly eliminate or
reduce fall armyworm abundance in a short period of
time. It is not uncommon to note a decrease in the
fall armyworm population after a larger population of
small larvae had previously been observed. For

example, in recent years the parasitoid wasp, Cotesia
marginiventris, occurred in large numbers and helped
control fall armyworms in many fields (Figure 10).
Fall armyworm predators are usually generalists and
include ground beetles, earwigs, predaceous bugs,
birds and rodents. Viruses, fungi, nematodes and
bacteria are among the pathogens that may attack
armyworms. Among these, the most important are
the nuclear polyhedrosis virus (NPV) and some of the
fungal diseases (Figure 11). True armyworms have a
similar complement of natural enemies.

UGA1739038

Figure 10. Cotesia marginiventris (Cresson), an internal
parasite of armyworms. Debbie Waters, University of
Georgia

Figure 11. Armyworm larvae killed by pathogens. Matt
Montgomery, Sangamon/Menard Extension Unit Educator,
University of Illinois

Scouting

The first and best approach to limiting armyworm
damage in forage production is scouting for these
pests before economic damage occurs. Producers
should also watch for bird (cattle egrets and other

=== New Page ===

birds) flocks feeding in fields because birds will
exploit armyworms as a ready food source. Early
signs of armyworm damage by small caterpillars
include leaves that are chewed on the underside only
and fields with a slight “frosted” appearance. Other
latter signs of armyworm outbreaks are dead areas of
fields and caterpillars stuck on vehicle tires driven
through the field.

When scouting, first check for armyworm larvae
in and around areas with dead grass or where birds
are feeding. Remember, true armyworms feed at
night and fall armyworms primarily feed in the early
morning and late afternoon, so if you are scouting
when armyworms are not usually active, you must
dig around in the thatch and at the base of the plant
to see the armyworms. Also look for other evidence of
armyworms such as frass (larval excrement that
resembles dark grass seeds).

Control decisions should be based on treatment
thresholds derived from sampling the field. In
general, insecticide treatment is warranted if three or
more half-grown armyworms per square foot are
present. The best way to conduct sampling is to make
at least 10 random samples across the field. Also
remember that moths often lay eggs in the lushest
part of the field, so include a few samples from these
areas. A sampling device constructed of 2 or % PVC
pipe that covers one square foot makes the sampling
much easier (Figure 12). After the sampling device is
randomly dropped, carefully examine grass blades,
stems, plant bases and thatch for caterpillars. Record
the number and approximate size of the caterpillars
found within the perimeter of the sampling device. To
make the process easier and reduce digging into
thatch with your fingers, use soap flushes (2 table-
spoons lemon-scented detergent and 1 gallon of
water) to drive caterpillars out of the thatch.

BY
Figure 12. Homemade PVC sampling device for counting
armyworms in one square foot of area.

Once fall armyworms are found infesting a field,
it is advisable to take note of that date. Remember
that infestations usually occur in waves about one
month apart, so scout accordingly. At minimum, scout
no more than two weeks after the initial infestation
occurred, and if an overlapping population was noted,
do not wait two weeks to begin scouting for the
second infestation.

Control

Proper timing of insecticide application results in
better control. In most cases, insecticide control is
warranted when an average of three or more worms
per square foot occurs. However, other factors, such as
the size of the caterpillars and maturity of the hay
crop, should be considered before making an insecti-
cide application. For example, if a hay field is heavily
infested and the grass is ready to harvest, consider
cutting and baling as soon as possible rather than
making an insecticide application. If the field is not
ready to cut and you have more than three very small
(% to % inch) caterpillars per square foot, do not treat
before necessary. Instead, get the equipment ready to
spray and monitor the field closely, because natural
enemies could possibly reduce the population below
treatment threshold within a short period of time. If
the population is not reduced, then treat when the
caterpillars reach % inch. Caterpillars larger than
% inch are difficult to kill, resulting in poor control.
Fully grown caterpillars (1% inches) are close to
pupation and may have already caused most of the
damage, thus an insecticide application may not
provide an economic benefit.

The best type of equipment to apply insecticides
for armyworm control is a properly calibrated boom
sprayer. If a boom sprayer is not available, a properly
calibrated cluster nozzle sprayer can be used but only
if it has a consistent spray distribution along the
entire swath width. In general, the absolute mini-
mum spray solution volume per acre is 10 gallons.
Higher volumes of spray solution usually result in
better and more even coverage.

Insecticide choices for armyworm control are
more numerous today than in past years. When
choosing insecticides, producers should consider
grazing or harvest restrictions, local availability,
cost and residual activity. Several of the newer prod-
ucts have little to no grazing or harvest restrictions.
Per-acre insecticide cost will vary from as low as
about $3.00 up to over $10.00. When calculating cost,
always consider the cost per acre and not the cost
per gallon of product. For example, a gallon of some
products may treat over 100 acres, while others may
only treat less than 10 acres. Generally, products

=== New Page ===

with longer residual activity will cost more per acre.
When armyworm pressure is high, longer residual
activity may be worth the extra expense and save
one application. Also remember, grass that has been
cut, grazed or is growing very fast following an insec-
ticide application may not have much insecticide
residue left.

Pyrethroid insecticides are faster acting than
insect growth regulators and work well on small and
medium-sized caterpillars. In general, insect growth

regulators will have longer residual activity than
pyrethroids. However, because insect growth
regulators are slower, they should be used when the
caterpillars are small. Most insecticide labels will
provide a rate range (low to high). Consider using the
higher rate if the armyworms are large because they
are harder to kill. Products available to control both
armyworm species in forage are updated annually and
listed in MP144, Insecticide Recommendations for
Arkansas, available at http://www.uaex.uada.edu
/Other_Areas/publications/PDF/MP144/C_Pasture.pdf.

Printed by University of Arkansas Cooperative Extension Service Printing Services.

DR. KELLY M. LOFTIN, associate professor and Extension entomologist,
DR. GUS LORENZ, professor, IPM coordinator and Extension entomolo-
gist, and RICKY F. CORDER, program associate - entomology, are with
the University of Arkansas Division of Agriculture. Loftin and Corder are
located at the Cralley-Warren Research Center in Fayetteville. Lorenz is
located at the Lonoke Agricultural Extension and Research Center.
FSA7083-PD-4-12N

Issued in furtherance of Cooperative Extension work, Acts of May 8 and
June 30, 1914, in cooperation with the U.S. Department of Agriculture,
Director, Cooperative Extension Service, University of Arkansas. The
Arkansas Cooperative Extension Service offers its programs to all eligible
persons regardless of race, color, national origin, religion, gender, age,
disability, marital or veteran status, or any other legally protected status,
and is an Affirmative Action/Equal Opportunity Employer.