# Document 124970

The Southern Fruitcast ry eSUTHERy \&
Fry

Episode 11: Fungicide Resistance Testing FRUS TL i SI

with Dr. Emran Ali DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE

[Intro] Thanks for tuning in to the Southern Fruitcast. This podcast aims to cover the
people, technology, and latest developments at small fruit production in the Southeast.
We are brought to you by the Southern Region Small Fruit Consortium and the
University of Arkansas System Division of Agriculture.

[Cato] I'm Dr. Aaron Cato, extension specialist for Commercial Fruit and Vegetable IPM.
at the University of Arkansas.

[McWhirt] And I'm Dr. Amanda McWhirt, extension production specialist for fruits and
vegetables, also at the University of Arkansas. Welcome back to the Southern Fruitcast.
Today we have with us Dr. Emran Ali. He's a plant pathologist at the Department of Plant
Pathology in the University of Georgia. He received his masters and Ph.D. degrees in
molecular plant pathology at Ehime University in Japan. And then following a brief
postdoctoral stint at the same institution, he completed additional postdoctoral
trainings at Ohio State University and at Washington State University. He's currently the
director of the Plant Molecular Diagnostic Lab at the University of Georgia. And today
he came on to talk with us about what that lab can offer, specifically with fungicide
resistance, testing, support that they offer in strawberries. Emran, thanks so much for
joining us today.

[Ali] Thank you very much for having me on your podcast.

[Cato] Sounds good. All right, Emran, so let's get started on questions. | think it would
be an excellent idea if we were to start off giving some more information about
fungicide resistance. Could you please explain what fungicide resistance is and how it
develops in pesticides and why we care so much about it?

[Ali] Thank you, Aaron. That's a really very good question. Fungicides are important
tools for managing diseases in modern crop production. Unfortunately, one of the risk
for using fungicide is the fungi sometimes develop resistance to them, which leading to
lost disease control and unnecessary expenses by applying products that no longer
work. Fungicides resistance mainly occur gradually or sometimes suddenly. In general,
fungicide with a single side mode of action are a higher risk for resistance development.

=== New Page ===

If a single mode of action fungicide - people use or used alone for a long time, it's more
likely to develop resistance against fungicide. In an orchard, resistance sometimes may
occur naturally, even [if you] never applied a fungicide before, but all the time the
resistant population grow. That scenario actually teach us that again and again, the
same product, same fungicide will make the products no longer active against the
starting pathogen. Thank you.

[Cato] Yeah. Thanks, Emran, | think that was an excellent answer.

[McWhirt] So when we talk about resistance to different fungicide classes, can you talk
a little bit about how we understand if resistance to one specific product or active
ingredient will also mean resistance to another product or active ingredient?

[Ali] Yeah, | think that's also a very important question. Thank you for asking me this
question. Yes, fungicide are generally classified according to their mode of action or
numeric we call FRAC Code. Then that's the reason for doing these is to facilitate the
resistance management. Fungal pathogen that are resistant to one active ingredient or
fungicide, often resistant to different active ingredient within the same FRAC code that
has similar types of mode of action. This we normally would refer to as cross resistance.
So | can give you one real world example. When you find resistance develops for a
certain isolate in your field, to azoxystrobin, like strobilurin fungicide. All other
strobilurin fungicide like pyraclostrobin or Trifloxystrobin... It is likely you will have no
activity against these isolate as well.

[Cato] Thanks, Emran. And so now let's move more specifically about fungicide uses
within strawberries. | think everyone that's listening currently knows that strawberries
are a very high risk of significant yield loss due to the many diseases that affect the
flowers and fruit of strawberries. So could you talk a little bit more about which diseases
or the pathogens that cause them better that are exhibiting resistance in the Southeast?
That may be problematic for growers?

[Ali] Yes, | think that's something that we all need to be very aware about that was
related to a strawberry production system. The fungal diseases are considered as the
major threat for the strawberry production in the southeast. Even (indecipherable) losses
from the fungal diseases can exceed almost 50% when environmental conditions favor
for the disease development. So anthracnose fruit rot caused by Colletotrichum and the
botrytis or gray mold that caused by botrytis pathogen are the most significant
diseases for the strawberry production in the Southeast. Interestingly, this is not only
South. These two are the major problem worldwide for the citrus production. Some

=== New Page ===

other diseases like you can see like fungal leaf spot or bacterial leaf spot, leaf blight,
powdery mildew are also seen in the strawberry production field in the southeast.

[Cato] And so just to kind of bring it home for the people that are listening — what can
growers or extension agents do to prevent fungicide resistance from occurring on their
farms, especially when we talk about anthracnose or gray mold.

[Ali] Yeah, | think that is also a very good question in terms of management issue. In
general to prevent the fungicide resistant issue grower need to focus using multi-site
fungicide instead a single mode of action fungicide or rotating as many different FRAC
groups into their fungicide program as possible. We know there is not a lot of option in
outside out, but as most as we can to rotate this single mode of action fungicide would
be very great help for managing this issue. Also, we can do tank mixture with different
mode of action fungicides we can put together and apply. That will also help to reduce
the fungicide resistance issue. That would be also another way we can do the good
culture practices that help us to manage this issue, like we can maintain the proper
sanitation, weed control, scheduled irrigation and row spacing, etc. | think might help to
make the disease pressure low in your field as well as the disease fungicide resistant
issue will be down.

[Cato] Yeah. | think those are very important aspects of disease management. You
know, when we talk about a single site mode of action, these kind of all kind of work in
concert, like they're different sites of modes of action. Right? If you're -

[Ali] That's true.

[Cato] Yeah. So if you're select, you're not going to select as easily if you're integrating
all these cultural practices alongside your fungicides.

[Ali] That's correct. Yeah.

[Cato] And so, let's move more specifically on what you do. Right. So at the plant
molecular diagnostic lab at Georgia, you all work to identify whether growers are
dealing with fungicide resistance on their farms. And can you talk more about why
classifying resistance at that farm level is important for growers?

[Ali] | think that's a very interesting question because if they maintain the classifying
resistance at the farm level, it will be very important tool. Ah, like to avoid the further
spreading of fungicide resistance. Let's see. If you buy a plant materials or plants from a
nursery with many times the pathogen also move along with the plant or materials.
Whatever you buy from an certain nursery. If this pathogen have fungicide resistant

=== New Page ===

issue in this previous nursery or orchard, then there will be a similar fungicide resistant
issue in the new farm too. That's why the clean on materials are critical for reducing
disease pressure, as well as minimizing the fungicide resistant problem. In actually, in
other crop system, | saw frequently people are making sure like buying their materials or
plant materials, they make sure their product, whatever they're passing are disease free
or pathogen free in that way, actually, we can maintain less fungicide resistant issue in
our production system.

[Cato] Yeah, | think those are all very important aspects of it. And | wanted to bring it
back to something you said earlier. You talked about, you know, using a fungicide that
won't work and how that's a waste of money. Right. And so if someone was to send you
samples and determine, say, maybe Elevate may not work on my farm, and then that
grower could potentially just avoid using Elevate and use other modes of action FRAC
fungicides. And that way they save money by not wasting an application. Right. Or and
in the in the meantime, if they wasted that application, then the potential for that
disease to build up or the pathogens to build up and get worse in their field.

[Ali] That's absolutely correct.

[McWhirt] All right, Emran, we just have one more question for you. So currently, the
Southern Region Small Fruit Consortium, which is one of our sponsors on the podcast, is
also provided support for growers to send in samples to your lab for free of charge until
the funds have been exhausted to do some of this testing. So could you talk a little bit
more about what growers will need to do to get you all a sample to determine if they
have resistance in Botrytis or Anthracnose?

[Ali] Now, thank you so much. So as a practical question, | think this is a very important
question in terms of the service we are providing. That's nicely explained. Our program
allows for a single location in the Southeast that can provide fungicide resistant testing
support for the multiple strawberry pathogens against multiple fungicides. The ultimate
goal for our program is to provide support to the growers and grower advisor. Then
they can able to establish a management protocol for their production system. This
program actually very crucial to guide growers in their use of effective fungicide to
reduce losses caused by fungicide resistance. The Southern Region Small Fruit
Consortium, this year we have received funding to provide service free of charge to a
small food producer in the member states. But we have funding limitations. The service
we are providing until the funds run out, this will be completely first-come, first-served
services. So a certain number of test we can do we are expecting all like a related to
state would send us a sample we can do free up testing service, but as soon as the fund

=== New Page ===

run out, the producer will need to pay for the extra service. For sampling the MPL,
accepts samples from preferably flowers, but we also accept samples from leaves, fruits.
Even you can send us the cotton swab. We just taking the spore from Botrytis and send
us that that those cotton swabs. You can easily buy those cotton swabs actually from the
Walmart. You don't need to be concerned about auto-plating all of those things. You
just simply buy those cartons from the Walmart and put in the block and send us for
testing. For the Anthracnose rot sample we only accept fruits with disease symptoms.
Please send us 15 to 20 freshly collected symptomatic samples. After collection of the
sample, so what you need to do, you just place each sample and individual sealed
plastic bag. Make sure, like that, the specimen or the sample you are collecting it are
representing for the entire field, not just only some a specific area. So that that way we
can make sure the result we are providing you, it will be very representative results for
your orchard and during when you submit the sample, please make sure you are
submitting the submission form with the all information we need. Especially we need
your information, your email address, your phone number or spraying history. What you
were sprayed last year or this year, the host species and a sampling location. So all this
information will be very valuable for us to making up a very nice data that can be helpful
for future fungicide resistant program management, very helpful tools, and be sure to
send us sample by overnight delivery. We saw in last two years, sometimes people send
sample in normal delivery that causes the sample degradation. So the result will be very
different if the sample quality got degraded. So the more details about our sample
submission and shipping address can be found on our website. You can visit the Plant
Molecular Diagnostic Lab, University of Georgia. So all the information and the
submission form is there, but is still if you need more information or if you have any
troubles to get those form, please don't hesitate. Just email or call us. We'll be happy to
provide you more information if needed.

[Cato] Yeah, thanks, Emran. So | have a quick question. | did a little bit of sampling last
year and sent some in and so when you say 15 to 20 samples per field, you mean take
15 to 20 fruit or, you know, especially with anthracnose, individual fruit from different
parts of the field and then put those within individual sealed plastic bags and then ship
those together, right, and that would be one field? Right?

[Ali] That's true. Yes, you are right. So we need to collect 15 to 20. But in a different,
different spot and different setback. You're right. That's correct.

[Cato] Okay. And | think | may have sent him one of the samples last year that was too
degraded for you to look at. But it was it wasn't my fault. By the time | got the fruit from
a grower, they were pretty they were pretty bad looking. They really wanted to know.

=== New Page ===

But we sent them overnight. And then by the time we all got on, they were extra
degraded. So.

[McWhirt] Well, Emran, we want to thank you again for joining us today. This is some
really important information for growers to have, especially where we're at in the season
as we head into bloom. So thank you for joining us here on the Southern Fruitcast.

[Ali] Again, thank you so much for inviting me. Important topics to talk and | hope the
growers listening these things and will be sending us more samples and we'd be happy
to provide the services.

[Cato] Of course. Thanks, Emran.
[Ali] Thank you.
[Music]

[Outro — Cato] Thanks for tuning into the Southern Fruitcast. Our episodes are hosted
by PodBean and also can be accessed on the University of Arkansas extension website at
uaex.uada.edu/southernfruitcast . Here you can see all of our episodes and provide us
feedback to help shape future episodes of this podcast.

[Outro —- McWhirt] We'd again like to thank the Southern Region Small Fruit
Consortium for funding this podcast. The consortium provides a large library of
production and integrated pest management resources at smallfruits.org. We'll be back
again soon with more updates on the southeast small fruit industry and interviews with
specialists, researchers, and farmers from across the region.