# Document 124997

RESEARCH & EXTENSION

Uy A DIVISION OF AGRICULTURE

University of Arkansas System

Agriculture and Natural Resources

FSA9512

Diagnosing a Farm
Profitability Problem

Scott Stiles
Instructor, Economics

Kelly J. Bryant
Professor and Director,
Southeast Research and
Extension Center

Arkansas Is
Our Campus

Visit our web site at:
https://www.uaex.uada.edu

Introduction

Farms of similar type and size
often have observed differences in net
farm income. Net income on any farm
depends on several factors, but much
of the differences in net income
between farms can be attributed to
farm size, physical efficiencies of
production, economic efficiencies of
production, enterprise combinations,
fixed cost structure and commodity
marketing. A complete analysis of
these areas of the farm business
should be conducted on a regular
basis. However, a diagnostic procedure
for locating the source of a farm
profitability problem is presented in
this publication. A flow chart is used
as a troubleshooting guide for
identifying sources of profitability
problems in a farm business. This
approach assumes that a profitability
problem does exist and uses the
value of farm production as the
starting point.

Value of Farm Production

The value of farm production is
one way to measure farm size. It could
also be called gross profit or gross
revenue. It measures the volume of
farm production in dollars and is
calculated as follows:

Total cash receipts

plus Inventory increases

plus Value of products used in home

minus Inventory decreases

minus Feeder livestock purchases

minus Feed purchased for feeder
livestock

equals Value of farm production

This gives the dollar value of all
agricultural production which has
taken place on the farm during the
year after adjusting for inventory
changes. The diagnostic procedure
illustrated here begins by looking at
the value of farm production.

Low Value of
Farm Production

If the value of farm production is
low, we follow the left side of the flow
chart (on page 2) to identify the
problem. Total cash receipts (which
make up the bulk of the value of farm
production) are basically:

Price per unit

times Units per acre
times Number of acres
equals Total cash receipts

Therefore, if any one of these
three items is low, then the value
of farm production will be low.
Proceeding down the left side of
the flow chart, we begin to diagnose
the reason for a low value of
farm production.

Farm Size

Check the number of acres or
number of head of livestock in the
operation. The farm manager may be
earning as much income as possible
off the size operation he currently
has. If this farm is smaller than the
profitable farms in the area, consider
increasing farm size or obtaining off-
farm employment to increase family

University of Arkansas, United States Department of Agriculture, and County Governments Cooperating

=== New Page ===

Procedure for Diagnosing a Farm Profitability Problem

Value of Farm Production

Low
Check farm size.

|
If satisfactory, check
physical efficiency
measures.

If low, improve with
better management
practices but watch
costs. Profit will not
increase if costs
increase as much as
income.

If satisfactory, check
average selling prices.

If too low, try other
marketing strategies.

value?

income. If farm size is adequate, check physical
efficiency measures (i.e., production per acre).

Physical Efficiency Measures

The idea here is to measure how much output you
are getting per unit of input. Yield per acre is by far
the most used physical efficiency measure for row
crops. There are many different ways to measure
physical efficiency in a livestock enterprise. Some of
the best ones would be average daily gain or average
milk production per dairy cow.

If the physical efficiency measure is low, consult
experts in areas such as soil fertility, pest control,
irrigation management or livestock production to
increase output. If the physical efficiency measure is
satisfactory for current enterprises, check average
selling prices.

If small, consider
increasing farm size
or obtaining off-farm

employment to
increase income.

If satisfactory for current
enterprises, check
enterprise combination.
Can the fixed resources
be used to produce
products with a greater

High
If high and profit is
low, the problem is

generally related to
costs.

Check fixed costs

such as machinery

cost, land charges

and farm overhead
costs.

If high, look for If low, check
possible reductions. economic efficiency
measures.

|
If satisfactory, make If poor, check prices
sure any government paid for inputs and
payments are being ways to reduce costs
utilized to their per unit of output.
full extent.

This table was adapted from Kay, Ronald D., Farm Management: Planning, Control and Implementations.
Second edition. McGraw-Hill, Inc., New York. 1986. p. 181.

Average Selling Prices

Poor marketing practices may be a cause of low
profits. If the prices you typically receive for your
products seem lower than the average or lower than
what other farmers are getting, you may want to
consider using a different marketing strategy. Consult
a marketing expert to determine a marketing
strategy that is right for you. Quality can also make a
big difference in the price you actually receive for
your crop. Producing a high-quality product usually
results in higher profits.

If your average selling prices are satisfactory
or above average, check your mix of enterprise
combinations.

=== New Page ===

Enterprise Combinations

Perhaps the fixed resources such as land, labor
and capital can be used to produce a different
combination of crops and livestock to increase net
income. The key to selecting a profitable enterprise
combination is to identify the most limiting resource
in the farming operation (usually land) and then
select those enterprises with the greatest returns per
unit of this limited resource.

High Value of Farm Production

If the value of farm production is high enough
to provide a satisfactory net farm income, the
profitability problem will generally be caused by
excessive costs. This requires following the diagnostic
procedures on the right-hand side of the flow chart.

Fixed Costs

The first thing to check is fixed costs, such as
machinery and building depreciation, interest and
general farm overhead costs. If they are high relative
to the farm size and value of production, steps should
be taken to reduce those which will have little or no
effect on the level of production. Reducing fixed costs
may be difficult and require some time, but all
current and new investments and their related fixed
costs should be carefully scrutinized. If the fixed
and overhead costs appear satisfactory, check the
economic efficiency measures for excessive
variable costs.

Economic Efficiency Measures

These are ratios of costs or returns per unit of
some input. There are many different measures you
could use, and a good accounting system could
produce any of them with little effort. Some of the
more common measures of economic efficiency are
fertilizer expense per acre, insecticide expense per
acre, herbicide expense per acre, diesel fuel expense
per acre, feed costs per 100 pounds of gain and rate of
capital turnover. Any variable cost category you can
identify should be examined. Converting these costs
to a per acre basis can make them comparable to the
cost of production estimates published by the
Cooperative Extension Service or to other farms
similar to yours.

Profitability Analysis and Financial Efficiency

There are many reasons for unprofitable
operations. The use of financial ratio analysis is one
approach that assists in identifying profitability
problems within an operation. Ratios provide a
common relationship that simplifies multi-year
business analysis. In some instances, ratio analysis
allows for balance sheet and income statement
information to be combined. This provides insight
relating to how the two statements influence one
another. To a great extent, net worth value on the
balance sheet is directly tied to profitability of the
income statement. A business’s net worth and equity
increases only if: 1) asset values appreciate or 2) a
net profit was produced. When a profit is generated,
it shows up on the bottom line of the income
statement and most likely in the current assets
portion of the balance sheet.

In the early 1990s, the Farm Financial Standards
Task Force established a set of financial benchmarks
or goals for agribusinesses. A partial listing of these is
found in Table 1. Given the diverse nature of
agricultural operations, it is important to consider the
size and type of business being analyzed. Acceptable
financial benchmarks will vary given the primary
crop or livestock enterprise.

Government Farm Program Benefits

Farm program benefits are essential to farms
that produce farm program commodities. Farms that
are eligible for program payments but are not
receiving the full benefit of the programs operate at
an economic disadvantage. Farm program benefits
indirectly affect the value of farm production, but
directly affect farm profitability.

Summary

This diagnostic procedure should help a farm
manager identify all the factors impacting the value
of farm production and help isolate areas in need of
improvement that could increase farm profitability.

Reference

Kay, Ronald D. Farm Management: Planning, Control and
Implementation. Second edition. McGraw-Hill, Inc. New
York. 1986. pp. 163-184.

=== New Page ===

Table 1. Profitability Analysis and Financial Efficiency.

Profitability Analysis

Calculation

Operating Profit Margin Ratio (NFIFO* + Farm Interest Expense —

Operator Management Fee) / Gross

Revenue >25% 10% - 25% <10%
Rate of Return on Farm Assets (NFIFO* + Farm Interest Expense —
(ROA) (mostly owned) Operator Management Fee) / Average

Total Farm Assets >5% 1% - 5% <1%
Rate of Return on Farm Assets (NFIFO* + Farm Interest Expense —
(ROA) (mostly rented) Operator Management Fee) / Average

Total Farm Assets >12% 3% - 12% <3%

Rate of Return on Farm Equity (ROE)

(NFIFO* — Operator Management Fee) /
Average Total Farm Equity

6% - 10% range is acceptable.
Varies depending on enterprise mix.

Financial Efficiency

Calculation

Operating Expense / Revenue Ratio Operating Expenses [excluding interest
(mostly owned) and depreciation] / Gross Revenue <65% 65% - 80% >80%
Operating Expense / Revenue Ratio Operating Expenses [excluding interest
(mostly rented) and depreciation] / Gross Revenue <75% 75% - 85% 385%
Interest Expense Ratio Interest Expense / Gross Revenue <12% 12% - 20% >20%

Depreciation Expense Ratio

Depreciation Expense / Gross Revenue

<12% is acceptable goal

Asset Turnover Ratio

Gross Revenue / Average Total Farm
Asset

>.35 is acceptable goal.
Varies depending on enterprise mix.

Net Farm Income from Operations Ratio

NFIFO* / Gross Revenue

>20% is acceptable goal

*NFIFO — Net Farm Income From Operations excluding gains or losses from the disposal of farm capital assets.

Ratio benchmark recommendations provided by the Farm Financial Standards Taskforce and Council.

Table adapted from “Understanding Key Financial Ratios and Benchmarks,” by Dr. David Kohl (retired), Virginia Tech University.

Acknowledgment is given to Dr. Rob Hogan, former assistant professor - economist - farm management at the Northeast Research and
Extension Center, University of Arkansas Division of Agriculture, who was one of the original authors of this fact sheet.

Printed by University of Arkansas Cooperative Extension Service Printing Services.

SCOTT STILES is an instructor - economics with the University
of Arkansas Division of Agriculture and is located at Arkansas
State University, Jonesboro. DR. KELLY J. BRYANT is a
professor and director of the Southeast Research and Extension
Center, Monticello, and is also with the University of Arkansas

Division of Agriculture.

FSA9512-PD-4-13RWC

Issued in furtherance of Cooperative Extension work, Acts of May 8
and June 30, 1914, in cooperation with the U.S. Department of
Agriculture, Director, Cooperative Extension Service, University of
Arkansas. The Arkansas Cooperative Extension Service offers its
programs to all eligible persons regardless of race, color, national

origin, religion, gender, age, disability, marital or veteran status, or

any other legally protected status,
Action/Equal Opportunity Employer.

and is an Affirmative